# (AESCHYLUS) Suppliant Women {#aeschylus_book-4}  
  
  
C> *This edition is based on the [publicly available](http://records.viu.ca/~johnstoi/aeschylus/suppliantwomen.htm) translation by Ian Johnston*  
  
  
TRANSLATOR’S NOTE

This translation is based, for the most part, on the Greek text of Herbert Weir Smith (1922, reprint 1930). The line numbers in square brackets below refer to that text; the line numbers without brackets refer to the English translation. Indented partial lines are included with the line above in the reckoning. All endnotes, indicated by an asterisk in the text, have been provided by the translator.  

The Greek text of *The Suppliant Women* is in many places corrupt and obscure (often incomprehensible), and various editors have supplied hundreds of possible variant readings. In much of the play, it is impossible to provide an English text without considerable guesswork. Given the difficulties with the text, a translator of the *Suppliant Women* faces a difficult choice: to try to remain as faithful as possible to the Greek and run the risk of a very awkward, unidiomatic English text or to treat the Greek text more cavalierly in order to make more fluent sense of the translation.  

Any translator of *Suppliant Women* who wishes to stay close to the Greek text must, I think, experience considerable frustration (that, at least, has been my experience). T. A. Buckley, who castigates translators for not remaining faithful to the Greek, seems to catch this mood in a comment he makes on line 210, “The whole passage, as it now stands, in fact, the whole play, is a mass of hopeless absurdity.” Later he repeats the sentiment: “To re-write the author by implication is not the business of the translator. . . . although I am nearly as much in the dark as ever” (p. 229). His translation is a useful example of how an attempt at literal fidelity to the Greek can produce a very awkward and often puzzling English text.  

Since my first priority is to produce a translation in an easily grasped modern idiom, a dramatic script that can be read, recited, or performed without a very awkward English getting in the way, I have taken a number of liberties with the Greek, although generally I have tried to steer a middle path between the two options and to remain faithful to the original Greek, as much as that is possible to make out. Those who wish to look at a more literal text which calls detailed attention to the problems with the Greek should consult Alan Sommerstein’s translation.    

I have relied a great deal on the work of a number of authors, notably F. A Paley, H. Weir Smyth, Walter Headlam, T. A. Buckley, and Alan Sommerstein.  
  
...  
  

**BACKGROUND NOTE**  

Aeschylus (c.525 BC to c.456 BC) was one of the three great Greek tragic dramatists whose works have survived. Of his many plays, seven still remain. Aeschylus may have fought against the Persians at Marathon (490 BC), and he did so again at Salamis (480 BC). According to tradition, he died from being hit with a tortoise dropped by an eagle. After his death, the Athenians, as a mark of respect, permitted his works to be restaged in their annual competitions.  

The Suppliant Women (also called The Suppliants or The Suppliant Maidens) was part of a series of four plays (the other three have been lost). The plays were based on the famous story of the daughters of Danaus, who sailed from Egypt seeking refuge in Greece. It is not clear when the play was first performed. Tradition held that it was a very early play, perhaps Aeschylus’ first, but recent evidence has contradicted that widely held view.  

Io, a young Greek girl persecuted by Zeus’ wife, Hera, had, many years before the play begins, been changed into a cow and forced to flee from Greece to Egypt, where she had given birth to a child by Zeus and established a family line. Generations later, the fifty daughters of Danaus, her descendants, were to be married to the sons of Aegyptus, brother of Danaus and king of Egypt. The daughters, unwilling to go through with the marriages, fled with their father to Argos, the land from which Io had originally left. Their would-be husbands, angry at this conduct, sailed in pursuit of them. The play opens with the arrival of the daughters in Greece.  
  
...  
  
  

**DRAMATIS PERSONAE**  

DANAUS: a descendant of Io.  
PELASGUS: king of Argos.  
HERALD: an Egyptian
CHORUS: daughters of Danaus. [^note-401]  
HANDMAIDENS: servants of the Chorus
ATTENDANTS  

*[The scene is a rocky shore in Argos, with a stone altar and some large statues of the gods on the stage to mark a patch of higher sacred ground. Enter DANAUS and the members of theCHORUS, who are dressed in foreign (i.e., non-Greek) clothes and carrying the branches of suppliants.]*

CHORUS
 I pray that Zeus who cares for suppliants
 will look with kindness on our company,  
 whose ship has travelled here across the sea
 from the fine-grained sandy estuary
 of river Nile. We fled that sacred land,  
 whose pastures border Syria, and come
 as fugitives, not exiled by decree
 of public banishment for shedding blood,  
 but acting on our own, because we wished
 to flee a marriage we could not accept, a hateful and sacrilegious match                                               
 with Aegyptus’ sons. [^note-402] For Danaus,                                                     
 our father, who is our counsellor
 and leads our group, debated what to do                                                     
 and of our painful options chose the best—  
 to rush away as quickly as we could,  
 sailing across the ocean seas to Argos.  
 We can claim with pride our family line
 comes from this land, for it sprang up
 from the hand and breath of Zeus, who touched that cow tormented by a gadfly’s sting. 
 To what land could we come which offered us                                
 more welcome kindness when our hands hold out
 these branches wrapped with wool, which indicate
 that we are here as suppliants. O this city,  
 this land and its clear streams, O gods above,  
 and you beneath the earth, stern punishers,  
 who guard the tombs, and third of all, you too,  
 O Zeus the Saviour, who defends the homes
 of righteous men, with this land’s spirit of care receive our female suppliant band, 
 and before that swarming horde of men,  
 those insolent sons born toAegyptus,                                               
 set foot upon this marshy shore, force them
 and their swift-moving ship back out to sea,  
 and there let them run into violent storms,  
 with lightning, thunder, rain-drenched hurricanes
 and perish in the wild and stormy waves,  
 before they ever carry us away, 
 their cousins, against our will, and climb into our beds, an act which Right forbids.  

 And now we call the Zeus-born calf,                                                  
 our champion from across the sea, offspring
 of our ancestor, the flower-grazing cow 
 caressed by Zeus’ breath, who in due time
 gave birth to Epaphus, whose very name
 derives from his own birth. [^note-403]  

 I call on him by name,  
 here in his mother’s ancient pasturelands.                                       
 Remembering the torment she once faced,  
 I will set out for those who live here now trustworthy evidence, and they will see
 some unexpected proofs, and at the end
 men will believe the truth of what I say.  

 Should someone living here and close to us
 be skilled in understanding songs of birds,  
 then when he hears our melancholy chant,  
 it will seem to him our singing voice,                                                
 belongs to Metis, Tereus’ poor wife,  
 the hawk-chased nightingale. [^note-404]  

 Forced out
 from her green leafy haunts, she cries in grief for her familiar woods and sings the tale
 of her child’s fate, who died at her own hand,  
 the victim of a merciless mother’s rage.  

 In the same way, too, I chant my grief,  
 invoking these Ionian strains.  
 I tear these tender cheeks of mine                                                     
 burned by Nile sun and rend my heart
 which has not yet known tears.  
 I gather flowers of grief, filled with fear
 that no friends will appear to stand by us as fugitives from that mist-covered land. [^note-405]  

 But you gods of our race, O listen to me!  
 Look for what is righteous in this case!  
 If you deny young men unjust desires
 and if you truly loathe their wanton lust,                                          
 you will uphold the lawful rights of marriage. 
 Even for fugitives worn down by war
 there are safe altars sacred to the gods.  

 I pray whatever comes from Zeus                                              
 will truly turn out favourably for us. What Zeus desires is hard to ascertain,  
 although it clearly blazes everywhere,  
 even in the dark, accompanied by Fate,  
 so riddling and obscure to mortal men.                                            

 His will is resolute, and when it falls
 it is not on its back—for once Zeus nods
 the deed is then fulfilled. [^note-406] But Zeus’ mind
 stretches on dark and tangled pathways,  
 which no one sees or understands.  

 Men with hopes                                        
 as high as lofty citadels he hurls to their destruction, and yet he works
 without the use of forceful arms,  
 for every act gods undertake                                                               
 is effortless. Seated at ease,  
 not stirring from his sacred throne,  
 he somehow manages to bring about
 whatever he desires.  

 So let him see
 the arrogance of human beings,  
 as in that family it grows again.  
 Thoughts of marriage made it thrive in stubborn hearts and wild intentions.  
 Driven by a spur they cannot check                                                   
 and disappointed in their hopes,  
 they set their minds on madness. 

 I wail aloud my suffering, my pain,  
 and mixed in with my tears I speak
 these clear and heavy tones—  
 Alas! Alas!—so like a funeral song!  
 And as I sing, I mourn for my own self,  
 while I am still alive.  

 O this land, these hills of Apia, I call to you,  
 for you well understand my words,  
 the speech of those from foreign lands.  
 Again and again I seize my veil,                                                         
 this linen veil from Sidon,  
 and tear it into shreds.  

 Offerings promised to the gods
 are plentiful when things go well, 
 once death has gone away. 
 Alas! Alas! This suffering so hard to understand! 
 O these surging waves of pain
 where are they carrying me?  

 O this land,  
 these hills of Apia, I call to you,  
 for you well understand my words,  
 the speech of those from foreign lands.  
 Again and again I seize my veil,                                                         
 this linen veil from Sidon,  
 and tear it into shreds.  

 Our oars and wooden rope-bound ship, our refuge from the sea, followed the winds
 on a storm-free trip, with no cause to complain.  
 But now I pray that Father Zeus,  
 whose eye sees everything, may grant
 in time an end that is auspicious,                                                       
 so that our sacred mother’s famous race
 escape men’s beds, unwedded and still free.  

 And may that holy daughter of Zeus 
 secure within the sacred walls
 be willing to gaze down on me, so willing to receive her! May she, 
 enraged that we are being pursued,  
 come down with all her strength to save us,  
 a virgin goddess helping virgin girls,                                                 
 so that our sacred mother’s famous race
 escape men’s beds, unwedded and still free. [^note-407]  

 If not, our dark and sunburnt race  
 will move with suppliant’s branches on to Zeus,  
 lord of earth, who welcomes all the dead.  
 For if Olympian gods deny our prayers, we will seek death and die by rope.                                                   

 O Zeus! That vengeful anger from the gods,  
 the wrath of those pursuing Io!  
 I know of Hera’s passionate moods, 
 the sky-conquering rage of Zeus’ queen.  
 From such harsh winds fierce storms arise.  

 And Zeus will then confront the charge
 of acting in a unjust way, if he dishonours
 the heifer’s child, who many years ago                                              
 he sired himself and now averts his gaze away from us when we implore his aid.  
 O from his place high in the sky,  
 may he hear us when we call!  

 O Zeus! 
 That venomous anger from the gods,  
 their wrath of those pursuing Io!  
 I know of Hera’s passionate moods, 
 the sky-conquering rage of Zeus’ queen.  
 From such harsh winds fierce storms arise.  

DANAUS
 Children, you must take care. You came here
 with a wise and loyal old man to lead that ship at sea—your father. Now on land,  
 I have been thinking of what lies in store.  
 So mark the words I say, and write them down—  
 preserve them on the tablets of your mind.                                      
 I see dust, an army’s voiceless herald,  
 and whirling axles in their socket hubs 
 do not move silently. I see armed men
 shield-bearing troops, each brandishing a spear,  
 with curving chariots and horses. Perhaps
 the ones who rule this land have heard reports and are now marching here to look at us.  
 But whether the one who leads this force
 is not a threat to us or is spurred on
 by cruel rage—whatever he may be—  
 the wisest course, my daughters, is to sit
 around this rock, a sacred monument 
 to the assembled gods. For an altar                                                   
 is a shield, impenetrable and more secure
 than any city wall. So you should move there
 with due reverence, as quickly as you can. In your left hands hold up those suppliant boughs
 wrapped with white wool, those righteous symbols
 which bring so much delight to merciful Zeus.  
 In your response to what these strangers ask,  
 invite compassion for your painful needs
 in speech appropriate for foreigners.  
 Explain to them why you have run away,  
 and mention that there was no blood involved.  
 But most of all, no trace of arrogance.  
 Let your face and eyes remain respectful, calm, and modest. Do not look too eager                                         
 to speak up or too reluctant. These traits
 the people here will think extremely rude.  
 Remember, too, to be subservient.  
 You are a foreigner, a fugitive,  
 and need their help. Those who have no power 
 should not use words which seem too insolent.  

CHORUS
 Father, you have given us good advice,  
 and we are prudent. We will take due care
 to keep your wise instructions in our hearts. May Zeus, our ancestor, gaze down on us!  

DANAUS
 Yes, may he look on us with gracious eyes.  

CHORUS
 I would now like to sit beside you.  

DANAUS
 Then waste no time, and move where you propose.  

[The CHORUS moves over to DANAUS, who is standing beside the altar and the statues of the gods on the stage]  

CHORUS
 O Zeus, have pity on us in our distress                                             
 or we will be destroyed.  

DANAUS
 If Zeus is willing 
 then all will turn out well.  

CHORUS
[Look over here—  
 there is a symbol drawn, some form of bird.] [^note-408]  

DANAUS
 It is the bird of Zeus—invoke his name.  

CHORUS
 We call to the rays of the sun, our saviour.                             
DANAUS
 And to Apollo, too, a sacred god,  
 who was exiled from heaven. [^note-409]  

CHORUS
 He understands our fate
 and will have sympathy for mortal beings.  

DANAUS
 May he indeed show sympathy to us
 and eagerly stand by to help our cause.  

CHORUS
 What other deities should I invoke?  

DANAUS
 I see a trident, symbol of Poseidon. [^note-410]  

CHORUS
 He brought us safely here—and now on land
 may he receive us kindly.  

DANAUS
 And this one here,  
 another god—Hermes the Messenger,      
 as pictured by the Greeks.  

CHORUS
 I pray that now 
 his messages announce good news to us
 and keep us free.  

DANAUS
 Honour these ruling powers
 at their communal shrine. Seat yourselves here,  
 on this sacred ground, like a flock of doves
 terrified of hawks, who are also birds,  
 their kindred, but enemies of theirs,  
 who pollute their race. If one bird feeds
 on other birds, how is that sacrosanct?  
 So how could a man who marries someone against her and her father’s will be pure?  
 A man who acts like that, once he has died,  
 will not escape a judgment for his crime
 in Hades, for there, they say, another Zeus                                      
 delivers final judgment on the dead 
 for wicked things they did. Be careful,  
 and speak to them the way I have advised,  
 so in this confrontation you prevail.  

[PELASGUS, king of Argos, enters with armed attendants]  

PELASGUS
 From what place do you group of women come?  
 This clothing is not Greek—the robes you wear are thickly woven and luxurious,  
 a foreign style. Who am I speaking to?  
 Your garments are not those of Argive girls
 and do not come from any part of Greece.  
 I am amazed that you are brave enough 
 to dare approach this place without a herald
 or a guide or someone to protect you.                                              
 I see those branches lying there beside you,  
 the usual emblem of a suppliant
 to those divinities who gather here. But that is all a native Greek could know.  
 In many other matters I could make
 a reasonable guess, but you are here,  
 and you can tell me what I wish to learn.  

CHORUS
 What you have said about what we are wearing 
 is not inaccurate. But I need to know
 how I should frame the words I speak to you.  
 Are you a private citizen, a herald,  
 or the one who rules this land?  

PELASGUS
 I assure you 
 you may speak to me in full confidence and answer what I ask. I am Pelasgus,                                                
 the son of Palaechthon, who was born from earth.  
 I rule this land. The people here are named
 after their lord and called Pelasgians.  
 They are the ones who work this fertile ground. 
 Through every region where pure Strymon flows
 I rule the regions on the western side.  
 My realm includes lands by the Perrhaebi,  
 and regions lying beyond Mount Pidnus
 up to the lands of the Paeonians, and Dodona’s mountain range. The ocean sea
 defines my boundaries. Within these limits
 I rule as king. This region here is Apia,                                              
 named for an ancient healer long ago.  
 For Apis, Apollo’s son, a prophet 
 and a healer from far away Naupactos,  
 cleansed this land of man-destroying monsters,  
 a dreadful colony of hostile snakes,  
 which Earth produced, responding to her rage
 at ancient bloody deeds which had defiled her. With consummate art, Apis found a cure
 and freed the land of Argos of this plague.  
 From that time on, as a reward for this,                                            
 the Argives think of Apis in their prayers. 
 And now that I have told you about Argos,  
 describe your lineage, and tell me more,  
 although our citizens take no delight
 in speeches which continue far too long.  

CHORUS
 Our story is a short and simple one.  
 We can boast we are a race from Argos, descended from a cow blest with a child.  
 My words will give full evidence of this.  

PELASGUS
 As I listen to your words, you strangers,  
 I find your story quite beyond belief. 
 How can your family come from Argos?  
 For in appearance you are far more like
 the women in Libya and not at all                                                      
 like women in this land. The river Nile
 might have produced a racial group like yours.  
 Your features look just like those images of females cast by Cyprian craftsmen, 
 or like those nomad women I hear about
 who ride on saddled camels, just like horses.  
 Their homeland borders Ethiopia. 
 If you were armed with bows, I would have guessed
 you surely must be Amazons, women
 who feed on meat and live apart from men.  
 But tell me more so I can understand                                                
 how you can trace your family line to Argos.  

CHORUS
 Is there a story here that Io once served as priestess in Hera’s shrine at Argos?  

PELASGUS
 Indeed there is. The story is well known.  

CHORUS
 And does that story ever talk about
 how Zeus made love to someone mortal?  

PELASGUS
 It does, but Hera knew of that affair.  

CHORUS
 How did those two resolve their regal quarrel?  

PELASGUS
 Argive Hera turned the girl into a cow.  

CHORUS
 And when that girl became a cow with horns,                                 
 did Zeus approach her?                                                              

PELASGUS
 They say he did, 
 but first he changed into a lusty bull.                                       
CHORUS
 How did that mighty wife of Zeus respond?  

PELASGUS
 She chose an all-seeing guard to watch the cow.  

CHORUS
 Who was that watchful sentinel you mention?  

PELASGUS
 His name was Argus, a son of Earth— 
 Hermes killed him.  

CHORUS
 What else did Hera do
 to that ill-fated cow?  

PELASGUS
 She sent a fly
 which keeps the cattle moving with its sting.  

CHORUS
 Those living by the Nile call it a gadfly.  

PELASGUS
 It drove her out of Argos—far away.  

CHORUS
 Your story matches mine in every detail.      
 Then she moved to Canobus and Memphis. 
 And there, once Zeus caressed her with his hand, 
 he produced a child.  

PELASGUS
 Who claims to be
 the calf that Zeus created with that cow?  

CHORUS
 He was called Epaphus, a fitting name, 
    “born from Zeus’ touch.”

PELASGUS
                                            [And what offspring
 did Epaphus produce?] [^note-411]  

CHORUS
 Libya—who reaped the fruit
 from the most extensive region of the earth.  

PELASGUS
 And, in your account, who else was born from her?  

CHORUS
 Belus, my father’s father. He had two sons. [^note-412]  

PELASGUS
 Now tell me your wise father’s name.  

CHORUS
 Danaus.  
 He has a brother, who has fifty sons.  

PELASGUS
 Do not withhold from me his brother’s name.  

CHORUS
 Aegyptus. And now you understand how far
 my ancestry goes back, I pray you act
 to save a group with links to Argos.  

PELASGUS
 It seems to me you share some ancient bonds
 with Argos. But what was it that took place
 to make you leave your father’s home like this?  
 What has gone wrong?  

CHORUS
 Lord Pelasgus, men’s evil fortunes come in many different shades, for nowhere
 do you see their troubles winged with feathers 
 which are identical. Who would have said                                        
 a sudden flight would bring us back to Argos,  
 a kindred race from long ago, fleeing 
 a hateful marriage bed.  

PELASGUS
 Why have you come here
 as suppliants to these assembled gods 
 holding those boughs fresh cut and wrapped with wool?  

CHORUS
 To avoid Aegyptus’ sons—we have no wish
 to be their slaves.  

PELASGUS
 Because you hate them? Or are you claiming they are being unjust?  

CHORUS
 Who would buy a master for herself 
 from her own relatives?  

PELASGUS
 That is a way
 men make their wealth and power grow.  

CHORUS
 And make it easy, should anything go wrong,  
 to get rid of their wives. [^note-413]  

PELASGUS
What should I do for you  
 to observe due piety and reverence?  

CHORUS
 When Aegyptus’ sons demand to have us back,  
 do not comply.  

PELASGUS
 A difficult request—  
 you are asking me to run the risk of war.                                
CHORUS
 But Justice keeps her allies safe from harm.  

PELASGUS
 Yes—if she has taken part in the affair 
 right from the start.  

CHORUS
 Honour the ship of state
 when it is wreathed in suppliant branches.  

PELASGUS
 Just looking at the shadows of this shrine
 makes me tremble. The anger of great Zeus,  
 the god of suppliants, is hard to bear.  

CHORUS
 O child of Palaechthon, Pelasgian lord,  
 hear me with compassion in your heart.  
 See me, a suppliant fugitive, running    
 like a heifer hunted down by wolves
 along steep mountain slopes, lowing
 to the herdsman to show him her distress
 and trusting that his strength will save her.  

PELASGUS
 I see your company of suppliants
 appealing to the gods assembled here
 and shaded by these fresh cut boughs.  
 This issue of your being the city’s guest— 
 may that not prove to be disastrous,  
 and may no causes we did not foresee bring unexpected strife into our state. 
 The city has no wish for that.  

CHORUS
 May Themis, 
 goddess who protects all suppliants, 
 a daughter of apportioning Zeus, look down                                   
 and see our flight brings you no harm. 
 And you with your mature experience
 should understand from younger hearts
 if you show reverence to a suppliant
    [and piously give offerings to the gods,  
 then you will never lack the gods’ goodwill]. [^note-414]  

PELASGUS
 But here you are not seated by the hearth
 inside my home. For if our city, 
 as a community, suffers from a stain, 
 then we must work, as a community,  
 to find the cure. And so, until I talk
 to all the citizens about these things,  
 I cannot make you any promises
 or offer help.  

CHORUS
 But you are the city.                                   
 You are the people. Since you are king
 with no one in authority above you, your will alone, all by itself, controls
 your county’s hearth and shrine, and from your throne
 you are the one who rules on everything. 
 Be careful you do not pollute the state!  

PELASGUS
 May such pollution fall upon my foes!  
 I cannot help you without risking war,  
 but it would be unwise to spurn your prayers.  
 I am confused, and fear now grips my heart,  
 to act or not to act and then accept                                                   
 whatever outcome fortune may present.                                 
CHORUS
 Think of the lofty god who watches us
 from high above, the one who guards 
 all suffering mortals in their pain 
 who cry to those close by and yet
 do not obtain from them the justice
 they deserve by customary right. 
 The wrath of Zeus, god of suppliants,  
 lies in wait—and wailing cries of grief
 from those who suffer punishment
 will not persuade him to relent.                                               
PELASGUS
 But if the laws of your own state declare
 Aegyptus’ sons are rightfully your lords 
 once they proclaim they are your next of kin, 
 then who would wish to speak against their claim?  
 You must defend yourself with your own laws,                               
 the statutes in the land from which you came,  
 to show they have no right to govern you.  

CHORUS
 O may I never find myself subjected
 to the authority of men! Instead,  
 I would rather choose to run away and chart my journey by the stars
 to escape a marriage I detest. 
 Take Justice as your ally and decide
 according to what gods consider right.  

PELASGUS
 This decision is not easy—and you
 must not require me to render judgment.  
 I have already said I will not do that,  
 although I am the king, before I talk
 to my own people, in case, at some point,                               
 should this matter prove more troublesome,    
 the citizens declare, “You showed respect
 to strangers and undermined our city.”

CHORUS
 Impartial Zeus, who shares the blood
 of either side in this dispute, 
 looks down, dispensing justice fairly—  
 to evil men due punishments
 to the righteous their reward.  
 With issues weighed so evenly
 why turn away from acting justly?  

PELASGUS       
 But here we need profound and sure advice, like a diver plunging deep into the sea,  
 with his eyes clear, not muddled or confused, 
 so this affair will turn out well for us                                                
 and, more than anything, not harm our state,  
 so you will not become a prize of war,  
 and we will not surrender you from here,  
 the seat and holy sanctuary of the gods,  
 and bring down to this land to live among us
 the grievous spirit of destructive vengeance, 
 who, even in Hades, does not free the dead. Surely you do not think we have no need
 for counsel to deliver us from that?  

CHORUS
 Reflect on this, and then in piety 
 and righteousness become our patron.                                             
 Do not betray a fugitive cast out
 from far away by godless banishment.  

 O you who hold all power in this land, 
 do not look on as I am led away,  
 abducted from this shrine of many gods.  
 Think the wanton violence of men, and guard against the anger of the gods.  

 Do not compel yourself to see
 all justice flouted, as your suppliants
 are taken from these sacred images                                                  
 and then, just like a horse, dragged off,  
 seized by the bands around our heads
 and our finely woven clothes.  

 Know this—whatever you decide,  
 your children and your house remain
 to pay the penalty in full. So bear in mind the power of Zeus                                            
 which works for justice.  

PELASGUS
 I have considered that.  
 Things have now reached the stage where I am forced
 to fight a major war with one group or the other,  
 a choice determined by necessity, nailed down                               
 as firmly as a ship’s hull in a winch. [^note-415]  
 There is no way to solve this without grief.  
 If things are stolen from a family home,  
 then Zeus, protector of our property, 
 may graciously restore what has been lost. A tongue may shoot out inappropriate words,  
 rousing a heart to anger and distress,  
 and soothing words can ease that painful speech.  
 But so that we do not spill family blood
 we surely need to offer sacrifice                                                         
 and slaughter many beasts to many gods,  
 to save ourselves from grief. I had no wish
 to enter this dispute. I would prefer
 to have no sense of troubles yet to come
 than to foresee them clearly. May all go well and prove my judgment false.  

CHORUS
 Hear now 
 the last of all these reverend appeals
 to your compassion.  

PELASGUS
 I am listening. 
 Speak up. Your words will not slip past me.  

CHORUS
 I have a twisted band around my chest
 and belts to hold my clothes . . .  

PELASGUS
 Yes. Things like that
 are most appropriate for female dress.  

CHORUS
 Well then, with these, I have, as you can see, 
 an excellent way . . . .  

PELASGUS
 What do you mean? 
 What are you trying to say? Tell me.     

CHORUS
 If you do not make solemn promises
 to our group here . . .  

PELASGUS
 How will these bits of clothing
 be any help to you?  

CHORUS
. . . these statues here
 will be adorned with strange new votive plaques.  

PELASGUS
 You talk in riddles. Speak more directly.  

CHORUS
 We will not wait, but hang ourselves right here,  
 on these images of the gods.  

PELASGUS
 I hear your words—  
 O how they lash my heart!  

CHORUS
 Now you understand—  
 for I have made you see more clearly.  

PELASGUS
 This issue is so hard to wrestle with, no matter where one looks—like a torrent,  
 a flood of ruin, bearing down on me,  
 a bottomless sea of sheer disaster                                                     
 no one can navigate. I am embarked,  
 and there is no safe refuge from the storm.  
 If I do not discharge my obligations
 to you as suppliants, you say you will commit
 an act that brings pollution to our state                                  
 too dreadful to describe. But if I stand 
 before the city walls and move to fight Aegyptus’ sons, your kinsmen, how can that
 not have a bitter cost? In a women’s cause
 men’s blood will stain the ground However,  
 the force of Zeus, who guards all suppliants,  
 makes me respect his wrath, since fear of that
 among all men deserves the highest awe.  

[Pelasgus moves to address Danaus]  

 So you, the aged father of these girls,                                                
 quickly collect some branches in your arms
 and set them down on other altars 
 to this land’s gods, so that all citizens can see a sign that you are suppliants
 and no one utters words against me,  
 for people are too fond of finding fault
 with those who rule. It could well be the case
 that those who see them will be moved by pity,  
 despise that band of insolent young men,  
 and treat your case with more benevolence,  
 since everyone feels sympathy for those
 whose cause is weaker.  

DANAUS
 It means a lot to us                               
 to have found someone who feels compassion, a patron for our cause. But you should send
 some of this country’s men with us as escorts
 and as guides, so we may find the holy shrines
 before the temples of the country’s gods,  
 the homes of those protectors of the state,  
 and proceed in safety through the city.  
 Our bodies do not look the same as yours—  
 a race raised by the Nile is different
 from one which lives beside the Inachus.  
 Take care that boldness does not bring on fear, for men have killed a friend through ignorance.  

PELASGUS
 You men, go with this stranger—what he says                                
 makes excellent sense. Take him to the shrines
 inside the city and the sacred altars.  
 Do not converse at any length with those
 you meet along the way, while you conduct
 this man who sailed here seeking refuge
 at our sanctuaries of the gods.  

[DANAUS and the ATTENDANTS leave]  

CHORUS
 You told him what to do, and he is gone,  
 as you instructed. But what am I to do? What reassurance can you offer me?  

PELASGUS
 Set your suppliant boughs down here,  
 the signs of your distress.  

CHORUS
 I will place them here,  
 just as you ordered.  

PELASGUS
 Now, move down over there,  
 around that level space.  

CHORUS
 How will that place
 keep me protected? It is not sacred ground.  

PELASGUS
 We will not let those flying birds of prey                                         
 swoop down and seize you.  

CHORUS
 But what if they are worse
 than hateful snakes and hostile to us?  

PELASGUS
 The words I spoke
 were meant to lift your spirits. Your reply should be more favourable.  

CHORUS
 But our hearts
 are terrified. It should be no surprise
 that we are very troubled.  

PELASGUS
 Excessive fear
 is always uncontrolled.  

CHORUS
 Then reassure us—  
 with words and actions ease our troubled hearts.  

PELASGUS
 Your father will not leave you here for long.  
 I am going to summon the citizens,  
 so I may put them in a friendly mood.  
 I will instruct your father what to say.  
 You should stay here to offer up your prayers     
 to Argive gods to grant what you desire.  
 I will go back and see what I can do.  
 May my words prove persuasive and fortune
 bring these events to a successful close.  

[Exit PELASGUS and his ATTENDANTS]  

CHORUS
 O blessed Zeus, lord of lords,  
 holiest of the holy, and of all
 the perfect powers the great perfection,  
 O listen to our plea! Protect your race
 from these men’s arrogant lust,  
 which you abominate, and hurl the madness on their black-benched ship
 into the purple sea.                                                                              

 Gaze down on us,  
 and look with favour on our female cause.  
 Recall the ancient story of our race,  
 that pleasing tale from long ago,  
 about our ancestor, the woman
 you loved. Remember all of it,  
 you whose soft caresses fondled Io.  
 We claim our race descends from Zeus,  
 and a native settler from this land.                                           
 I have returned to ancient tracks
 where Argus spied on mother Io,  
 as in that fertile meadowland                                                             
 she grazed among the flowers. 
 Here that gadfly’s painful sting
 drove her insane. She ran away,  
 wandering through many tribes of men,  
 and then, as Fate decreed, sliced through
 the surging waters of the strait,  
 fixing the boundary of the distant shore. [^note-416]  

 She hurried on through Asian lands,  
 through Phrygian meadows full of sheep,  
 and past Teuthras where the Mysians live,  
 the valley lands of Lydia, across the hills                                         
 that mark Cilician and Pamphylian lands,  
 racing through ever-flowing river streams,  
 through deep and fertile soil, and past
 the wheat-rich land of Aphrodite. [^note-417]  

 Forced by her flying herdsman’s sting,  
 she reached the nourishing groves of Zeus, that snow-fed meadow lashed by Typho’s rage,  
 where waters of the Nile flow past
 untouched by all disease, driven mad
 by suffering she did not deserve,  
 and frantic from that painful goad,  
 a frenzied girl possessed by Hera! [^note-418]  

 The men then living in that land,  
 turned pale with fear and trembled at the sight,  
 a strange half-human monstrous thing,  
 a beast with such a dreadful shape, part woman and part cow!                                                                    
 Amazement seized them as they looked.  
 Who was it, then, who in the end
 brought peace to wandering Io’s pain,  
 the torment of that stinging fly?  

 That was the work of Zeus, who rules
 through endless time. With the power
 of his own soothing hand and sacred breath
 he brought her suffering to an end,  
 as her tears fell to end her shame. And then, according to a true report,  
 she took in Zeus’ seed, conceived a child,                                         
 and bore a blameless son . . .  

. . . who through long ages has been blessed.  
 And after that throughout the land
 the cry rang out—“This race, in fact,  
 is sprung from life-producing Zeus.”
 For who but Zeus could put an end
 to that disease which Hera planned?  
 If you proclaim that this is Zeus’ work and our race springs from Epaphus,  
 then you will state the truth.  

 To which of the gods could we appeal                                              
 more reasonably for his just deeds?  
 He is our father and our king.  
 With his own hand he made us grow,  
 the mighty parent of our race,  
 whose wisdom spans the ages.  
 From Zeus, who arranges everything,  
 come winds that make things prosper.                                    
 He does not rush to carry out
 some other god’s commands,  
 nor is he ruled by someone greater.  
 No power above keeps him in awe.  
 And once he speaks, the work is done—  
 the counsels carried in his heart
 he instantly brings into being.  

[Enter Danaus]  

DANAUS
 Lift your hearts, my children. The people here                                 
 have acted well—with full authority
 they have passed a public vote.  

CHORUS
 Greetings to you father, a messenger with very welcome news.  
 Tell us the outcome of the people’s vote.  
 What did the majority of hands decide?  

DANAUS
 The Argives did not seem to hesitate—  
 they made my ancient heart feel young again.  
 The air was thick with arms as all of them
 in full assembly voted in this law,  
 by raising their right hands: we are free
 to settle in this land. We will not be seized
 by anyone and carried off as hostages. We are protected from what men may do.                                        
 No one—no resident or foreigner—  
 can act against us. If any man tries force,  
 then those who own some land and do not help
 will be disgraced and by a public vote
 will suffer banishment. Those were the words
 delivered by the Pelasgian king
 on our behalf—and he persuaded them
 by claiming that in years to come the wrath
 of Zeus, god of suppliants, would never let the city thrive. He declared the curse
 would be a double one, for we are strangers
 and also from this land. It would appear
 before the city and prepare a feast                                                     
 of evils they could not resist. At these words
 the Argive people did not even wait
 to hear the herald speak, but raised their hands
 to say what should be done. Once they heard
 the way the speaker turned his argument,  
 the Pelasgian people were convinced and voted for what he had just resolved.  
 But it was Zeus who brought us this result.  

CHORUS
 Come, chant a prayer that blessings fall
 upon the Argives for their blessed work.  
 May Zeus, the god of strangers, hear
 these tributes from a stranger’s lips
 and make them truly reach their goal,  
 so all of them are perfectly fulfilled.  

[As the Chorus steps forward to chant this long prayer, Danaus moves to the highest point in the back of the stage to look out over the sea]  

 And now, you Zeus-born gods,                                                          
 hear us as we pour forth prayers of blessings for our Argive kin. 
 May fire from Ares, god of war,  
 who with incessant battle cries
 cuts down men in foreign fields,  
 never lay waste this Pelasgian land,  
 for people here took pity on us 
 and voted to support our cause,  
 respecting our unhappy flock                                                                 
 as suppliants of Zeus.  

 They did not scorn our female plight and cast their votes to favour men.  
 For they revered that watchful one,  
 the agent of divine revenge,  
 a god no one can stand against.  
 What house would have that messenger 
 perch on the roof, which it defiles 
 and where its grievous weight                                                            
 sits hard upon the home. 
 These men revere blood relatives,  
 petitioners to sacred Zeus, and thus with altars left unstained
 they win the favour of the gods.  

 And therefore from our shadowed lips
 may prayers of gratitude fly up
 to honour them. [^note-419] May no plague
 ever strike this town and leave it
 empty of its men, nor any strife                                                         
 stain this country’s soil with blood
 from its own slaughtered citizens. 
 May no one gather up the flower of Argive youth, and may that god 
 who sleeps in Aphrodite’s bed, 
 man-killing Ares, not slice away
 men in their finest bloom.  

 May altars blaze with offerings,  
 gifts to the elders gathered there,  
 so their city will be wisely ruled,                                                       
 since these men worship mighty Zeus,  
 above all else the god of strangers,  
 who by an ancient law guides Fate. We pray new rulers always rise
 to serve as guardians for this land.  
 And may Artemis-Hecate keep watch
 protecting women giving birth. [^note-420]  

 Let no man-killing slaughter come
 to turn the city against itself,                                                             
 by arming Ares, father of tears.  
 He is no friend of dance or lyre
 and stirs up cries for civil strife.  
 May joyless flocks of foul disease stay far from citizens’ heads,  
 and may Apollo always show
 to all the young his gracious favour.  

 May Zeus bring earth to yield its crops
 and bear its fruit in every season.                                                      
 And in their fields may grazing herds
 produce new calves in great abundance.  
 May good things from the gods be theirs,  
 and may musicians at their altars sing
 auspicious songs, and from pure lips let hymns of praise accompany the lyre.  

 May all those here who rule the state
 firmly protect the people’s rights,  
 with prudent counsel for the public good.                                         
 To strangers may they grant the right,  
 before they arm themselves for war,  
 of honest arbitration with no pain.  

 And may they always worship gods
 who guard this land, by holding high
 their native country’s laurel boughs and offering bulls for sacrifice,  
 just as their fathers used to do,  
 for honouring parents is a law,  
 the third of those engraved by Justice,  
 whose honour reigns on high.  

[Danaus speaks from his vantage point, looking out to sea]  

DANAUS
 Dear daughters, I commend these prudent prayers.                       
 You must not fear to hear your father’s words,  
 his troubling, unexpected news. From here,  
 my lookout on this shrine for suppliants,  
 I see their ship. For it is clearly marked. I could not fail to see it—those sails,  
 that leather hide along the side, that prow
 with eyes in front that watch its onward track,  
 obeying the guiding rudder in the stern,  
 too skilfully for those who are her foes.  
 The sailors on the ship are clear to see,  
 the white clothes make their blackened limbs stand out.             
 And I can see the other ships, as well,  
 and those assisting them. The ship in front,  
 with her sails furled and rowers keeping time, is now approaching land. You must stay calm
 and face this matter. Keep yourselves controlled.  
 Do not forget these gods. I will return
 when I can find our friends and other men
 to plead our cause. Perhaps a herald will come,  
 or some ambassador, eager to seize you
 as stolen property and drag you off.  
 But they will not succeed. So have no fear.  
 But still, if we are slow in bringing help,                                          
 it would be better if you kept in mind, at every moment, the help these gods provide.  
 Take heart. In due time, on the destined day,  
 the mortal man who disrespects the gods
 will meet his punishment.  

CHORUS
 I am afraid, father,  
 those ships are sailing in on such swift wings! 
 Before much time has passed they will be here!  
 I truly am so terribly afraid 
 that our long flight will be no help to us.  
 O father, this fear is killing me!  

DANAUS
 Since the Argives voted so decisively, be brave, my children. They will fight for you.                                 
 Of that I am certain.  

CHORUS
 Aegyptus’ vile sons,  
 lascivious men, are greedy for a war.  
 You know that, too. In dark-eyed timbered ships
 they sailed here with a huge black host of men.  
 That rage of theirs has now caught up with us.  

DANAUS
 Here they will find a force of men whose arms
 are lean and strong, toughened by midday suns.  

CHORUS 
 Do not leave us alone here, father,  
 I beg you. A woman left by herself is nothing. She has no spirit for war. 
 These men have wicked minds and evil hearts.                               
 Their schemes are devious—like ravens,  
 they have no reverence for sacred altars.  

DANAUS
 My children, if the gods, as well as you,  
 despise these men, then that is good for us.  

CHORUS
 Father, they are not afraid of tridents
 or objects sacred to the gods—these things
 will not stop them from laying hands on us.  
 They are arrogant men, full of impious rage, like shameless dogs, with no thought of the gods.  

DANAUS
 But, as the saying goes, wolves can conquer dogs                           
 and papyrus fruit is not a match for wheat. [^note-421]  

CHORUS
 They have the temperament of savage beasts,  
 profane and rash. We must protect ourselves,  
 and quickly.  

DANAUS
 When setting out or anchoring
 a naval force moves slowly. For cables
 to tie up the ship must be hauled onshore,  
 and shepherds of the ships do not feel safe
 as soon as anchors are securely fixed, especially when they reach a coast 
 which offers them no harbour, at sunset 
 with night moving in. In prudent pilots                                            
 the night time tends to breed anxiety.  
 Besides, they cannot properly arrange
 to disembark their troops before the ship
 is confident it is quite safely moored.  
 Although you are afraid, remember this:
 do not ignore the gods. [I will be back]  
 once I have found assistance. The city will not complain about the messenger.  
 He may be old, but still his heart and tongue
 are in their youthful prime.  

[Exit Danaus, on his way to the city]  

CHORUS
 O land of hills, for which I feel
 such righteous veneration, 
 what will become of us? And where
 in Apian land do we now flee,  
 if there is anywhere a place,  
 a deep dark pit, where we can hide?  
 I wish I could become black smoke, move up beside the clouds of Zeus,                                                   
 and spreading upward without wings  
 completely vanish, like the dust
 that no one sees, and perish!  

 I can no longer flee this evil.  
 My trembling heart is turning black.  
 What my father saw has shaken me,  
 and I am overwhelmed with fear.  
 I would prefer to meet my doom
 in a knotted noose than see a loathsome man come near my flesh!                                              
 Before that happens, let me die!  
 Let Hades be my lord and master!  

 O for a seat somewhere up high
 in the upper air, where watery clouds
 turn into snow or else a barren crag,  
 a steep and lonely towering peak
 where no goats roam and vultures fly,  
 invisible from below, a place 
 to watch my plunge into the depths, before I am compelled to marry
 and my heart breaks in two.  

 From now on I would not refuse                                                        
 to serve as prey for carrion dogs
 or as a feast for native birds.  
 For death delivers us from ills
 that love to feed our sorrow. 
 Let my death come, O let it come,  
 before the wedding bed.  
 What way of flight can I still find to save me from this marriage?  

 So with a voice that reaches heaven
 cry to the gods our songs of prayer.  
 O father Zeus, look down on us,  
 fulfill somehow what we desire,                                                        
 so we may find relief and peace.  
 May your just eyes find no delight 
 in violent acts, and may you guard
 your suppliants, almighty Zeus,  
 protector of this land.  

 Aegyptus’ sons, whose arrogance is hard to bear,  
 are coming after me, a fugitive,  
 with cries of lust, in their desire                                                        
 to capture me by force. You hold
 the balance beam that governs all,  
 and for we mortal human beings,  
 without you nothing is fulfilled. [^note-422]  

 [Enter an Egyptian HERALD, with an armed escort.]  

CHORUS [^note-423]  
 Aaaiiiii! Aaaiii! Here on the land
 my ravisher approaches from the sea. 
 May you die before you seize me! I cry out in my grief and pain!  
 I see what they are going to do,                                                          
 to take me off by force. Aaaiii!  
 Move off—run to our sanctuary
 there on the shrine. The savage insolence
 on sea and land we cannot bear.  
 O lord of earth, protect us!  

[The members of the Chorus move up onto the higher parts of the shrine and cling to the statues of the gods]  

HERALD
 Come down from there—and hurry!  
 Move off swiftly to the ships,  
 as fast as feet can get you there. If not, we’ll rip out all your hair,  
 or stab you with our spears,  
 or slice off heads in streams of blood!                                               
 Damn you, get down from there!  
 Start moving to the ship! And hurry!  

CHORUS
 Would you had died in your bolted ship
 while sailing here on the great salt sea,  
 you and your masters’ arrogant pride!  

HERALD
 I order you to stop these cries. Come on!                                          
 Leave this sanctuary! Move to the ship! One with no city or honour here
 gets no respect from me.  

CHORUS
 O never again may you behold
 the stream that feeds our oxen,  
 the river Nile, which nourishes
 by its increase life-giving blood
 for mortal men. I am native here,  
 old man, and from an ancient line.                                                     

HERALD
 I’m ordering you to move to the ship.  
 Willing or not, get yourselves on board! If I lay violent hands on you
 to force you there, you’ll suffer.  

CHORUS                                                                                                                         
 Alas! Alas!  
 May you all perish helplessly,  
 driven off course on the raging sea
 by eastern winds onto shoals of sand,                                                                                                                                                                                                             
 wrecked at Sarpedon’s burial mound! [^note-424]  

HERALD
 Keep up these shrieks of yours, these cries,  
 and keep on summoning the gods.  
 You will not escape an Egyptian ship,  
 not even if you scream and wail and chant more bitterly than this.  

CHORUS
 May mighty Nile,  
 who nurtures you, dissolve away                                                       
 your insolent pride and kill you.  

HERALD
 I’m ordering you to our curving ship,  
 as quickly as you can—no stalling.  
 We’re not afraid to force you down
 and haul you off by the hair.  

CHORUS
 Aaaiii, father! These sacred images—  
 they are not helping me! Step by step
 the spider creeps to drag me out to sea, a dark black dream, a nightmare!  
 Alas! Alas! O mother Earth,                                                                
 O mother Earth, turn aside
 these fearful words he shouts.  
 O son of Earth! O father Zeus!  

HERALD
 I’m not afraid of these Argive gods.  
 They had no part in raising me
 and will not help in my old age.  

CHORUS
 The two-footed serpent in his rage
 is closing in on me—like a snake he grabs and bites my foot.  
 Alas! Alas! O mother Earth, 
 O mother Earth, turn aside
 these fearful words he shouts.                                                            
 O son of Earth! O father Zeus!  

HERALD
 If you refuse to move to the ship,  
 That dress you’re wearing won’t be spared—  
 we’ll rip it into shreds.  

CHORUS
 We are lost!  
 O king, the evil pain we must endure!  

HERALD
 It seems
 I’ll have to drag you away by your hair, since you are so slow to do what I say.  

CHORUS
 You chiefs and leaders of the city, 
 these men are taking me by force!  

HERALD
 You’ll soon be seeing many leading men,  
 Aegyptus’ sons, and you won’t need to ask
 who is in control. So lift your spirits.                                                

[Enter king Pelasgus with an armed escort]  

PELASGUS
 You there, what are you doing? What insolence
 has led you here to disrespect this land
 of Pelasgian men? Perhaps you think
 you’ve reached a state made up of women? For a barbarian confronting Greeks
 you are far too arrogant. Your mind
 has not been thinking as it ought to do,  
 and you have made a number of mistakes.  

HERALD
 Where in this affair have I been wrong
 and gone against my rights?  

PELASGUS
 First of all,                      
 you are a foreigner but have no sense
 of how to act as one.  

HERALD
 How is that true?  
 I am taking what I lost and now have found.  

PELASGUS
 To what patron in this land did you appeal?                          
HERALD
 To the mightiest patron of them all—                                              
 to the Searcher god, to Hermes.  

PELASGUS
 You talk of gods,  
 and yet you disrespect these deities.  

HERALD
 I worship those around the river Nile.  

PELASGUS
 So, as I understand, these gods of ours
 are nothing to you?  

HERALD
 Unless some person here
 seizes these girls and takes them from me,  
 I’m leading them away.  

PELASGUS
 If you touch them,  
 you’ll soon have reason to regret you did.  

HERALD
 I hear your words—they’re not hospitable.                             
PELASGUS
 I don’t show hospitality to those
 who rob the gods.  

HERALD
 I will go now and tell
 Aegyptus’ sons about what’s happened here.  

PELASGUS
 To my mind that is no concern at all.  

HERALD
 However, so I may know what’s going on                                         
 and speak more clearly—for a herald’s task
 requires a detailed, accurate report—  
 what do I say about the man who stole
 these women away from their own cousins?  
 War god Ares does not use witnesses to judge a case like this or take silver
 to settle a dispute. Before all that,  
 many will fall and twitch away their lives.  

PELASGUS
 Why should I tell you my name? In due time,  
 you and your people will all learn of it.  
 As for these women, you may lead them off,                                   
 if you convince them in a righteous argument
 and they all willingly agree to go.  
 This issue has been dealt with in a vote
 of all the people in the city here— it was unanimous: never to give
 this band of women up to any force.  
 A bolt through this decree keeps it nailed down.  
 It is immoveable. Though not inscribed
 on tablets or sealed up in folds of books,  
 from the tongues of people free to speak
 you’ll hear it clearly. Now go! Out of my sight
 as quickly as you can!  

HERALD
 It looks as if                                        
 we are about to launch a brand new war.  
 May strength and victory be with the men!                            
PELASGUS
 You’ll find the people of this land are men—  
 their drinks are never brewed from barley! [^note-425]  

 [The HERALD exits, going back to the Egyptian ships. PELASGUS turns to the women of the CHORUS]  

 Now, all you women, take courage. Move off
 with your handmaidens here, who are your friends,  
 inside our city’s massive walls, fenced in
 with a ring of well-built towers. [^note-426] For lodging
 there are many homes owned by the people.  
 I, too, have a house, built at no small expense,  
 where you may stay with many others
 in nicely furnished rooms. However,   
 if you would rather live in your own home,  
 apart from others, that, too, is possible.  
 Feel free to choose the place you like the best,  
 the one you find the most agreeable.  
 I and all the people in the city
 who cast their votes are your protectors. 
 Why wait for those with more authority?  

CHORUS
 O noble king of the Pelasgians,  
 you are so gracious to us. In return
 may you enjoy your fill of blessings! Be kind enough to send our father here,  
 brave Danaus. He is our counsellor,  
 and we are guided by his prudent words.                                         
 For, above all others, it is up to him
 to advise us on the houses where we live
 and places which will prove hospitable.  
 For everyone is quite prepared to blame
 a foreigner.  

[Exit PELASGUS]  

 May all things turn out well!  
 May we retain our reputation here
 and incite no angry words from citizens. And now, dear handmaidens, arrange yourselves
 as Danaus has assigned you to attend
 on each of us, as servants in our dowry. [^note-427]  

 [The HANDMAIDENS move to stand among the members of theCHORUS. Enter DANAUS, with an armed group of Argive soldiers]  

DANAUS
 My children, we must offer prayers of thanks                                  
 to Argive people—make sacrifice 
 and pour libations out to them, as if
 to Olympian gods. They have saved us!  
 They did not hesitate. For once they heard
 me talk about the conduct of those men,  
 your cousins, towards their family, they were indignant and provided me
 this band of spearmen as a retinue,  
 so I might have an honourable rank
 and not be killed quite unexpectedly,  
 struck by some fatal spear in secret,  
 and place a lasting curse upon this land.  
 Those who obtain great favours ought to show
 deep gratitude, from the bottom of their hearts,  
 and hold such men in even greater honour.                                     
 Among the many other words of wisdom from your father etched into your minds,  
 write down this one, too: a band of strangers
 proves itself in time. All men are prepared
 to say bad things about a foreigner.  
 They somehow find disgusting insults easy.  
 So I advise you—do not dishonour me.  
 For at your age men are attracted to you,  
 and guarding tender fruit is always hard.  
 Animals and men, of course, destroy it,  
 and beasts that fly or walk upon the earth.    
 Cypris proclaims the fruit is ripe and ready,  
 and every man that passes by, overwhelmed
 with passionate desire, shoots from his eye
 a magic arrow at young virgin girls,  
 so young and lovely. [^note-428] We must not suffer
 the very things from which we ran away
 with so much effort, when our ship ploughed
 across that spacious sea, or shame ourselves
 and please my enemies. As for our housing,  
 we have the choice of two: Pelasgus’ home    
 or what the city offers. Both these options
 come without a cost—a generous gift.  
 Just take care. Obey your father’s words,  
 and honour modesty more than your life.  

CHORUS
 In other things may the Olympian gods
 be favourable. As for my ripe young age,  
 dear father, you can rest assured.  
 Unless the gods are planning something new,  
 I will not swerve aside and leave the path 
 my heart has set in what it felt before.                                    
 Go now, and let us celebrate
 the sacred gods who guard the city
 and those who live along the stream
 of ancient Erasinus. And you there,  
 you handmaidens, join in our song. [^note-429]  
 And let us pour forth chants of praise
 for this place where Pelasgians live,  
 no longer honouring with our hymns
 the flowing mouths of river Nile.  

    [^note-430] Sing to the rivers here that pour their tranquil waters through the land,  
 enrich its soil with fertile streams,  
 and make things grow in great profusion,  
 May holy Artemis look down                                                             
 and have compassion for our band.  
 And may we never be compelled
 by Cytherea’s force into a marriage.  
 Let that prize go to those whom I detest! [^note-431]  

CHORUS OF HANDMAIDENS
 But in this gracious hymn we chant,  
 we mean no disrespect for Kypris, whose power ranks alongside Hera
 and very close to Zeus. She is revered,  
 the goddess full of devious wiles,  
 for all her sacred works. With her,  
 in their dear mother’s company,  
 Desire stands with sweet Persuasion,  
 a deity who will not be denied.                                                          
 Harmonia has received as well
 a share of goddess Aphrodite
 and the whispering ways of Love.                                             
 I fear what lies ahead for fugitives—  
 winds of evil, pain, and bloody wars.  
 How did they travel here so easily
 with that swift ship in their pursuit?  
 Whatever Fate decrees will come to pass.  
 The great and infinite mind of Zeus
 cannot be overcome. This marriage                                                   
 may well be destined to take place
 the way it has for many women before.  

CHORUS
 O great Zeus, 
 save us from marriage to Aegyptus’ sons!                               
HANDMAIDENS
 That might, in fact, be best.  

CHORUS
 You seek to charm someone
 whose heart cannot be swayed.  

HANDMAIDENS
 What lies in store you do not know.  

CHORUS
 How could I see into the mind of Zeus?  
 No one can penetrate that deep abyss.  

HANDMAIDENS
 You need to moderate your prayers.  

CHORUS
 What moderation would you have me learn?                                   

HANDMAIDENS
 Do not ask for too much from the gods.  

CHORUS
 May lord Zeus save me from a marriage
 with a wretched man whom I detest, just as he used his healing hand
 to bring back Io and with gentle force
 released her from her pain.  

 And may he make the women strong.  
 I will accept a mix of good and bad
 for that is better than mere trouble.                                                    
 So now let justice judge our cause
 and with my prayers deliver me
 through saving efforts of the gods.  

[They all leave in the direction of the city]  

 
...  

EPILOGUE  

Suppliant Women is the first or second work in a sequence of four plays. The others have been lost except for fragments. However, the general outline of the traditional story is well known. In the ensuing battle between the Argives and the sons of Aegyptus, king Pelasgus is killed, and Danaus becomes king of Argos. The daughters are compelled to go through with the marriages, and, acting on their father’s instructions, they kill their husbands on the wedding night—all except Hypermnestra, who refuses to kill her husband, Lynceus. After the death of Danaus, who is killed by Lynceus, Hypermnestra and Lynceus become the new king and queen of Argos. It is not clear exactly how Aeschylus brings the story to a close.  

 
...  


[^note-401]: All speeches by members of the Chorus are indicated in the text by the word CHORUS, although in a production of the play these will be divided up, with some spoken by a Chorus Leader, some by individual members of the Chorus, and some by various group of choral members, as a director will determine. 

[^note-402]: Branches wound with white wool were the traditional sign of a suppliant. A suppliant was a person, usually a foreigner in distress, making a formal appeal, in the name of the gods, for protection or refuge (similar, in some ways, to modern refugees appealing for asylum). 

[^note-403]: Aegyptus and Danaus were brothers, so that the young women were being asked to marry their first cousins. There is, however, continuing uncertainty about whether the Chorus’ main objection is to marriage per se or whether they are objecting to marriage to these particular men (or both). 

[^note-404]: Epaphus means touch. 

[^note-405]: Metis was an alternative name for Procne, wife of king Tereus of Thrace. Tereus raped Procne’s sister, Philomela, and then mutilated her. In revenge the two sisters killed Tereus’ childItys and served the flesh to him at a meal. The three of them were all changed into birds. Metis, transformed into a nightingale, was always singing laments for her lost child. 

[^note-406]: The “mist covered land” in Egypt, so named for the appearance of its coastline to ships. 

[^note-407]: The metaphor is taken from wrestling. To fall on one’s back is to lose a round to one’s opponent. 

[^note-408]: The virgin daughter of Zeus mentioned is Artemis, daughter of Zeus and Leto. 

[^note-409]: There is apparently a line missing here. The words in square brackets have been provided to maintain the logic of the conversation (on the basis of a suggestion by Paley). 

[^note-410]: Apollo quarrelled with Zeus over the death of his son, Aesculapius, and killed the Cyclops who made Zeus’ thunderbolts. As a result, he was exiled from heaven for a number of years and was forced to labour for hire on earth. 

[^note-411]: Poseidon, brother of Zeus, was god of the sea. 

[^note-412]: The words in square brackets are based on a conjecture by Bothe to supply a missing line (Paley). 

[^note-413]: There may be some lines missing here. Traditionally, Libya’s first child was Agenor, and Agenor produced Belus. 

[^note-414]: Families can grow powerful by intermarriage because such unions preserve the resources of the couple within the same family group. Discarding a wife is presumably easier in these marriages because there is no rival family to deal with. 

[^note-415]: The words in brackets are an adaptation of a suggestion by Paley for a gap in the text. 

[^note-416]: The two groups are the gods, who require shelter for the suppliants, and the sons of Aegyptus, who are demanding the return of their female cousins. Paley notes that the shipbuilding metaphor seems to refer to a machine which keeps the planks tightly in place as they are being nailed down. 

[^note-417]: Io, driven out of Argos by the stinging gadfly, eventually crossed into Asia Minor at the western end of the Euxine Sea (Black Sea). Her crossing, so the story goes, is the origin of name Bosphorus (meaning the crossing of the cow), traditionally the boundary between Europe and Asia. 

[^note-418]: These geographical details trace Io’s journey from north to south through Asia Minor and across to Aphrodite’s land, Cyprus, on her way to Egypt. 

[^note-419]: Typho (or Typhon or Typhoeus) was a monstrous son of Earth who fought against Zeus. Zeus defeated Typho and imprisoned him underground (traditionally under Mount Etna). The monster creates storms and earthquakes when he struggles to get free. 

[^note-420]: Their lips are “shadowed” either because they are holding their suppliant branches in front of their faces or because they are wearing veils. 

[^note-421]: Artemis and Hecate, two different goddesses, were commonly identified as a single goddess. 

[^note-422]: The contrast of food stresses the difference between the Argives and the Egyptians: papyrus was a common source of food in Egypt and wheat in Greece. 

[^note-423]: Zeus his commonly pictured as holding up his scales and weighing alternative outcomes in a particular event. The result determines what will happen. 

[^note-424]: The text of this exchange between the Chorus and the Egyptian herald (to line 908 in the Greek) is very corrupt, and much of the English text is mere conjecture. 

[^note-425]: Sarpedon is a warrior leader in Homer’s Iliad, a major ally of the Trojans. When he is killed his body is, with divine aid, taken to his home in Asia Minor for burial. 

[^note-426]: Paley notes that the Egyptians drank a variety of beer. Pelasgus is presumably implying that real men, like the Argives, drink wine. 

[^note-427]: The Greek text does not use the word “handmaidens,” but rather “group of friends,” which could refer to the Argive escort. There is some doubt about whether the Handmaidens are part of the play or not. 

[^note-428]: As Sommerstein points out (p. 417), this is the only specific mention of the Handmaidens in the text of the play. He suggests that they may have been added in a later production. 

[^note-429]: Cypris is another name for Aphrodite, goddess of love. 

[^note-430]: It is not clear who is being addressed here (the word for “handmaidens” is not in the Greek text), whether the invitation to join in is directed at other members of the chorus or at the handmaidens or at someone else. Since in the exchanges which follow one of the groups is seeking to calm down the other and to advise it not to be so passionately afraid, the dramatically logical choice would seem to be the Handmaidens. It would be rather odd to divide the Chorus against itself, with half the members having a very different feelings from the other half. Some modern editors have assigned the lines of this “alternate” Chorus to the group of Argive soldiers who accompany Pelasgus. That option takes care of a number of staging problems which occur with the Handmaidens. 

[^note-431]: Cytherea is a common alternative name for Aphrodite. 
  

