# Orestes {#euripides_book-orestes}  
  
C> *This edition is based on the [publicly available](http://records.viu.ca/~johnstoi/euripides/orestes.htm) translation by Ian Johnston*  
  
  
*For some background information on the House of Atreus, see [this section](#intro-house-of-atreus)*  
  
...  
   
**DRAMATIS PERSONAE**  
  
**ELECTRA**: daughter of Agamemnon and Clytaemnestra, sister of Orestes.  
**HELEN**: wife of Menelaus, sister of Clytaemnestra.  
**HERMIONE**: daughter of Menelaus and Helen.  
**CHORUS**: young women of Argos.  
**ORESTES**: son of Agamemnon and Clytaemnestra, brother of Electra.  
**MENELAUS**: king of Sparta, brother of Agamemnon, uncle of Orestes and Electra.  
**TYNDAREUS**: father of Helen and Clytaemnestra, an old man.  
**PYLADES**: prince of Phocis, a friend of Orestes.  
**MESSENGER**: an old man.  
**PHRYGIAN**: one of Helen’s Trojan slaves, a eunuch.  
**APOLLO**: divine son of Zeus and Leto, god of prophecy.  
  
[Scene: The action of the play takes place in Argos just outside the royal palace a few days after Orestes has avenged the murder of his father by killing his mother, Clytaemnestra, and her lover, Aegisthus. At the opening, Orestes is lying ill on a bed near the doors. Electra is sitting close to him]  
  

ELECTRA  
 There’s nothing terrible one can describe,  
 no suffering or event brought on by god,  
 whose weight humans may not have to bear.  
 The blessed Tantalus—and I don’t mock him  
 for his misfortunes—who was, so they say,  
 born from Zeus, flutters in the air, terrified  
 of a rock hanging right above his head.  
 People claim he’s paying the penalty,  
 because, although he was a mortal man  
 who was considered equal to the gods in the feasts they shared together, he had  
 a shameful illness—he could not control                                         
 his tongue. [^note-401] Well, Tantalus fathered Pelops,  
 and then from that man Atreus was born,  
 the one for whom the goddess combing yarn  
 spun out strife, making him the enemy  
 of his own brother, Thyestes. [^note-402] But why  
 should I describe these horrors once again?  
 Then Atreus killed Thyestes’ children  
 and fed them to him. Then, there’s Atreus— I won’t mention what happened in between.  
 With Aerope, who came from Crete, as mother,  
 Atreus fathered glorious Agamemnon,  
 if, indeed, he was a glorious man,  
 and Menelaus, too. Menelaus  
 then wed Helen, a woman gods despise,                                         
 while lord Agamemnon, in a wedding  
 notorious in Greece, took Clytaemnestra  
 as his wife. To him from that one woman  
 were born three daughters—Chrysothemis, Iphigeneia, and me, Electra,  
 and a son, as well, Orestes, all of us  
 from an abominable mother who snared 
 her husband in a robe he could not escape  
 and slaughtered him. It’s not appropriate  
 for a young girl to talk of why she did it,  
 and so I leave the matter indistinct  
 for people to consider. Why should one  
 accuse Phoebus of injustice, even though  
 he did persuade Orestes to strike down the mother who had given birth to him,  
 an act which did not earn him a good name                                    
 in all men’s eyes? [^note-403] Still, he obeyed the god  
 and killed her. I helped with the murder, too,  
 doing as much as any woman could,  
 and Pylades assisted us as well.  
 After that poor Orestes grew so ill.  
 Infected with a savage wasting sickness,  
 he’s collapsed in bed and lies there, driven  
 into fits of madness by his mother’s blood. I am ashamed to name those goddesses,   
 the Eumenides, who keep driving him  
 through terrible ordeals. [^note-404] It’s the sixth day  
 since our mother perished in that slaughter  
 and her body was purified in fire—                                                  
 in that time he’s not swallowed any food  
 or washed his skin. He stays wrapped in a cloak.  
 And when his body does find some relief  
 and his mind clears from the disease, he weeps.  
 At other times he leaps up out of bed and bolts like a colt released from harness.  
 Argos has proclaimed no one should shelter us,  
 receive us by their hearths, or speak to us,  
 since we killed our mother. This very day  
 will be decisive—the Argive city  
 will cast its vote whether the two of us  
 must be stoned to death or have our throats cut                            
 with a sharpened sword. We do have one hope  
 we won’t die—the fact that Menelaus  
 has reached this land from Troy—his flotilla now fills up the harbour at Nauplia, 
 where he rides at anchor by the headlands,  
 after wandering for so long at random.  
 But as for Helen, who caused such grieving,  
 he sent her on ahead to our own house,                                          
 waiting until night, in case anyone  
 whose children died at Troy might see her,  
 if she went strolling there during the day,  
 and injured her by starting to throw stones.  
 She’s inside now, weeping for her sister and the troubles which have struck her family.  
 Though she suffers, she has some consolation—  
 Hermione, the daughter she left at home  
 when she sailed off to Troy, who Menelaus  
 brought from Sparta and gave to my mother  
 to bring up, brings her great joy and helps her  
 forget her troubles. I keep on watching  
 all the roads for the moment I can see  
 Menelaus coming. Unless he saves us,  
 we don’t have much strength to ride this out.   A house plagued with bad luck has no defence.                              

[Helen enters from the place]  

HELEN  
 Child of Clytaemnestra and Agamemnon,  
 poor Electra, you’ve remained unmarried  
 such a long time now. How are things with you  
 and your unlucky brother Orestes,  
 who killed his mother? That was a mistake.  
 But I ascribe it to Apollo, and so  
 I don’t risk pollution talking to you.  
 And yet I do lament my sister’s death,  
 Clytaemnestra, whom I never saw after I sailed off to Troy, driven there 
 by that fated madness from the gods.  
 Now I’ve lost her, I weep for our misfortune.                                   

ELECTRA  
 Helen, why should I now describe for you  
 what your eyes can see—Agamemnon’s home  
 facing disaster? I sit here sleepless  
 beside this wretched corpse—his faint breathing  
 makes the man a corpse. Not that I blame him  
 for his suffering. You’re the one who’s lucky.  
 Your husband’s fortunate as well. You’ve come when what’s going on with us is miserable.  

HELEN  
 How long has he lying like this in bed?  

ELECTRA  
 Ever since he shed his mother’s blood.  

HELEN  
 Poor wretch!                                      
 And his mother, too, given how she died.  

ELECTRA  
 That’s how it is. He’s broken by his troubles.  

HELEN  
 Girl, would you do something for me please,  
 in the name of the gods?  

ELECTRA  
 I’m busy here,  
 sitting with my brother.  

HELEN  
 Would you be willing  
 to come with me to my sister’s tomb?  

ELECTRA  
 To my own mother? Is that what you want? But why?  

HELEN  
 So I can take an offering from me,  
 hair and libations. [^note-405]  

ELECTRA  
Is it somehow wrong  
 for you to visit a family burial mound?  

HELEN  
 I’m ashamed to show myself in public  
 among the Argives.  

ELECTRA  
 After all this time  
 you’re thinking wisely. Back when you left home  
 that was disgraceful.  

HELEN  
 What you say is right.                                     
 But you’re not talking to me as a friend.  

ELECTRA  
 What makes you feel shame among the people  
 in Mycenae? [^note-406]  

HELEN  
 I fear the fathers of those men who died at Troy.  

ELECTRA  
 That’s a real fear. In Argos  
 it’s on people’s lips.  

HELEN  
 So relieve my fears.  
 Do me that favour.  

ELECTRA  
 I couldn’t do it—  
 look at my mother’s grave.  

HELEN  
 But for servants  
 to take these offerings would be disgraceful.  

ELECTRA  
 Why not send Hermione, your daughter?  

HELEN  
 It’s not good for an unmarried girl  
 to walk around in public.  

ELECTRA  
 She’d be repaying  
 the dead woman for looking after her.  

HELEN  
 What you say is right, girl. You’ve convinced me.       
 I’ll send my daughter. Your advice is good.  

[Helen calls in through the palace doors]  

 Hermione! Come on out, my child,  
 out here in front.  

[Hermione enters from the palace]  

 Take the libation  
 in your hands and this hair of mine, and go  
 to Clytaemnestra’s burial site. Pour out  
 the stirred-up honey, milk, and frothing wine.  
 Then stand on top the mound and say these words,  
      “Helen, your sister, offers these libations,  
 fearing to come to your tomb in person,  
 afraid of the Argive mob.” And ask her to look with kindness on you and me                                              
 and my husband, and on this wretched pair  
 some god has ruined. Promise funeral gifts,  
 all the things I should give to my sister.  
 You must leave now, my child, and go quickly.  
 When you’ve offered libations at the tomb,  
 return back here as quickly as you can.  

[Hermione takes the offerings and leaves, going away from the palace. Helen exits  
into the palace]  

ELECTRA  
 O nature, how vicious you are in men,  
 a saviour, too, for those who do possess  
 what works to their advantage. Did you see how she’s trimmed her hair only at the ends  
 to preserve her beauty? She’s the woman  
 she has always been. May the gods hate you  
 for ruining me and him and all of Greece!                                        
 I’m so unhappy!  

[The Chorus enters]  

 Here they are again,  
 my friends who sing with me in my laments.  
 They’ll soon end my brother’s peaceful sleep  
 and melt my eyes with tears once I see him  
 in his mad fit. You women, dearest friends,  
 move with a quiet step and make no noise, no unexpected sound. Your kindness here  
 is dear to me, but if you wake him up,  
 what happens will be difficult for me.  

CHORUS  
 Keep quiet! Silence! let your steps be light.                                     
 Make no sound at all.  

ELECTRA  
 Keep away from him— 
 further from his bed, I’m begging you!  

CHORUS  
 There, I’ve done as you request.  

ELECTRA  
 Ah yes, but speak to me, dear friend,  
 like the breathing of a tiny reed  
 on a shepherd’s pipe.  

CHORUS 
 There, you see. I’m keeping my voice pitched soft and low.  

ELECTRA  
 Yes, that’s fine. Come over. Come on.  
 Move gently. Keep moving quietly.  
 Tell me the reason why you had to come.                                        
 He hasn’t fallen asleep like this for ages.  

CHORUS  
 How is he? Give us a report, dear friend.  
 What shall I say has happened to him?  
 What’s ailing him?  

ELECTRA  
 He’s still breathing—  
 feeble groans.  

CHORUS  
 What are you saying? The poor man!  

ELECTRA  
 You’ll kill him if you distract his eyes while he’s enjoying sweet gifts of sleep.  

CHORUS  
 Pitiful man, suffering for those hateful acts                                     
 inspired by a god.  

ELECTRA  
 Yes, it’s pitiful.  
 An unjust god uttered unjust things  
 in what he decreed, when Loxias  
 from Themis’ tripod passed his sentence,  
 the unnatural murder of my mother. [^note-407]  

CHORUS  
 Do you see? His body’s moving in his robes.  

ELECTRA  
 You wretch, you’ve forced him to wake up  
 with your chatter.  

CHORUS  
 No, I think he’s sleeping.                              
ELECTRA  
 Won’t you just go away? Leave the house.                                       
 Retrace your steps, and stop the shuffling.  

CHORUS  
 He’s asleep.  

ELECTRA  
 You’re right. O sacred lady Night,  
 who gives sleep to toiling mortal men,  
 come from Erebus, come, wing your way here  
 to Agamemnon’s home. [^note-408] In misery  
 and suffering we’ve gone astray. We’re lost.                                    
 You’re making noise again. O my dear friend,  
 won’t you keep quiet, stay silent, and take care  
 to keep your voice some distance from his bed? Let him enjoy the peaceful gift of sleep.  

CHORUS  
 Tell us what’s in store to end his troubles.  

ELECTRA  
 Death. What else? He’s lost desire for food.  

CHORUS  
 Then this is obviously his fate.                                                         

ELECTRA  
 Phoebus made us his sacrificial offering  
 with his pitiful unnatural proposal  
 to kill our mother, who killed our father.  

CHORUS  
 But it was just.  

ELECTRA  
 Yes, but not good.  
 You killed, mother who bore me,                                              
 and were killed. You wiped out a father and children of your blood.  
 We’re done for, good as dead, destroyed.                                        
 You’re with the dead, and my own life  
 is gone—the greater part of it now spent  
 with groans, laments, and tears each night,  
 unmarried, childless—so pitiful—  
 I drag out my life on and on forever.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Electra, you’re right beside your brother.  
 Check if hasn’t died without your knowing.                              
 I’m worried—he’s looking too relaxed.      

ORESTES [waking up]  
 O lovely charms of sleep which bring such help  
 against disease, how sweetly you came over me  
 when I was in such need. Sacred Oblivion,  
 who removes all troubles, how wise you are,  
 for those who suffer from misfortune,  
 a goddess worth invoking in their prayers.  
 But where did I come from to get here? 
 How did I reach this place? I can’t recall.  
 I’ve lost all my earlier recollections.                                                 

ELECTRA  
 Dearest one, how happy it made me feel when you fell into that sleep. Do you want me  
 to hold you and to prop your body up?  

ORESTES  
 Yes, hold me. Give me some support. And wipe  
 the dried up foam from my sore mouth and eyes.                           

ELECTRA  
 There. It’s sweet to be able to help out.  
 I won’t refuse to nurse my brother’s limbs  
 with a sister’s hand.  

ORESTES  
 Support my side with yours,  
 and push the matted hair out of my face.  
 My eyes aren’t seeing very well.  

ELECTRA  
 O this filthy hair, your poor suffering head— so much time has passed since it’s been washed,  
 you look just like a savage.  

ORESTES  
 Put me back,  
 on the bed again. Once the madness leaves,  
 I’m exhausted . . . no strength in my limbs.  

ELECTRA  
 There you are.  
 The sick man loves his bed, a painful place,                                     
 but still it’s necessary.  

ORESTES  
 Set me up again.  
 Turn my body round. The sick are helpless—  
 that’s why they’re hard to please.  

ELECTRA  
 Would you like  
 to have me put your feet down on the ground?  
 You haven’t tried to walk for some time now. A change is always pleasant.  

ORESTES  
 Yes, do that.  
 It’s better if I look as if I’m well, 
 even though that’s far from being true.  

ELECTRA  
 Now, my dear brother, listen to me,  
 while the Erinyes let your mind stay clear.  

ORESTES  
 You’ve got some news. If it’s good, you’ll help me—  
 if harmful, I’ve had enough misfortune.                                           

ELECTRA  
 Menelaus has come, your father’s brother.  
 His ships are anchored at Nauplia.  

ORESTES  
 What are you saying? Has he just arrived to be a light to save us from these troubles,  
 yours and mine, a man of our own family,  
 with a sense of gratitude to father?  

ELECTRA  
 He’s come—you can trust what I’m telling you—  
 and he’s brought Helen from the walls of Troy.  

ORESTES  
 He’d be someone to envy even more  
 if he’d managed to survive all by himself.  
 By bringing back his wife, he’s coming here  
 with all kinds of trouble.  

ELECTRA  
 Yes, Tyndareus 
 fathered a race of notorious daughters, dishonoured throughout Greece.                                                     

ORESTES  
 Make sure you’re different,  
 not like those evil women. You can be.  
 But don’t just say it. You have to feel it.                    

ELECTRA  
 Alas, brother, your eyes are growing wild.  
 In an instant you’ve again gone mad,  
 and just now you were thinking clearly.  

ORESTES [in a fit]  
 Mother, I’m begging you, don’t threaten me,  
 not those young snake girls with their bloodshot eyes.  
 They’re here! They’re closing in to jump on me!  

ELECTRA  
 Poor suffering wretch, stay still there on your couch. You think you see them clearly, but it’s nothing— there’s nothing there for you to see.  

ORESTES  
 O Phoebus,                               
 they’re killing me, those dreadful goddesses,  
 the fierce-eyed, bitch-faced priestesses of hell.  

ELECTRA [holding Orestes]  
 I’ll not let go. I’ll keep my arms around  
 and stop you writhing in this painful fit.  

ORESTES  
 Let go! You’re one of those Furies of mine,  
 grabbing me around the waist to throw me  
 down into Tartarus!  

ELECTRA  
 I feel so wretched.  
 What help can I get when divine power is ranged against us?  

ORESTES  
 Give me my horn-tipped bow,  
 Apollo’s gift—he said I should use it  
 to defend myself against these goddesses  
 if they frightened me with bouts of madness.                                  
 One of those divine women will get hurt  
 by a human hand if she doesn’t move  
 out of my sight. Aren’t you paying attention?  
 Don’t you see the feathered arrows speeding  
 from my far-shooting bow? Ah . . . ah . . .  
 Why are you waiting then? Use your wings and soar into the upper air, and blame  
 Apollo’s oracles. But wait a moment!  
 Why am I raving and gasping for air?  
 Where . . . where have I jumped? Out of bed?  
 After the storm I see calm water once again.  
 Sister, why wrap your head in your dress and cry?                          
 I’m ashamed to make you share my suffering,  
 to bring distress to an unmarried girl  
 with this sickness of mine. Dont pine away 
 because of my misfortunes. Yes, it’s true you agreed to do it, but I’m the one  
 who shed our mother’s blood. I blame Apollo,  
 who set me up to carry out the act,  
 which was profane. His words encouraged me,  
 but not his actions. And I think my father,  
 if I’d looked him in the eye and asked him  
 if I should kill my mother, would’ve made  
 many appeals to me, reaching for my chin,                                      
 not to shove my sword into the neck 
 of the woman who’d given birth to me, since he would not return into the light  
 and I’d be wretched, suffering ills like these.  
 So now, sister, take that veil off your head.  
 And stop your crying, even though our plight  
 is desperate. When you see me in a fit,  
 you must reduce the harsh destructive parts  
 inside my mind and soothe me. When you groan,  
 I must be beside you and comfort you  
 with my advice. When people are close friends                               
 it’s a noble thing to offer help like that. But now, you poor girl, go inside the house.  
 Lie down and let your sleepless eyelids rest.  
 Have some food to eat and wash your body.  
 For if you leave me or catch some illness  
 by sitting here with me, then I’m done for.  
 You’re the only help I’ve got. As you see,  
 all the others have abandoned me.  

ELECTRA  
 I won’t leave. I choose to live here with you,  
 even to die. The choice remains the same.  
 If you die, what will I, a woman, do? How will I be saved all on my own,  
 without a brother, father, or my friends?  
 Still, I must do it, if you think it’sright.                                           
 But set your body back down on the bed,  
 and don’t fret too much about the terror,  
 the agony that drives you from your bed.  
 Lie still here on the couch. For even if  
 you’re not really sick but think you’re ill,  
 that still makes people tired and confused.  

[Electra goes into the house]  
  
CHORUS  
 Aaaiiii . . . .you winged goddesses roaming in that manic frenzy,  
 your god-appointed privilege,  
 not some Bacchic ritual                              
 but one with tears, cries of grief—                                                    
 you dark skinned kindly ones,  
 racing through the wide expanse of air  
 demanding justice for blood,  
 a penalty for murder,  
 how I beseech you, beg you,  
 let the son of Agamemnon lose   all memory of furious madness.  
 Alas! What harsh work you strove for,  
 you poor man, when you received,  
 from Phoebus’ tripod, the oracle                                                       
 which he delivered in his shrine,  
 that cavern where, so people say,  
 one finds the navel of the earth. [^note-409]  

 O Zeus, what pitiful event,  
 what bloody struggle is now here,  
 goading you in your misfortune— an avenging spirit bringing tears  
 to add to all your tears, sending  
 your mother’s blood into your home  
 and driving you to raving madness?  
 I grieve for you—how I grieve for you.  
 Among mortal men great prosperity                                                
 never lasts. No. Some higher spirit  
 shatters it like the sail on a fast ship  
 and hurls it into waves of dreadful sorrow,  
 as deadly as storm waves out at sea. What other house should I still honour  
 as issuing from marriage with the gods  
 apart from those who come from Tantalus? [^note-410]  

[Menelaus enters, with an escort]  

CHORUS  
 But look, the king is now approaching—  
 lord Menelaus. His magnificence                                                     
 makes it plain to see that by his blood  
 he comes from the sons of Tantalus.  
 Hail to you, who with a thousand ships  
 set off in force for Asian land, and find  
 good fortune now among your company. With god’s help you’ve managed to achieve  
 all those things you prayed for.  

MENELAUS  
 O my home—  
 I look on you with joy, now I’ve come back  
 from Troy, but I’m also full of sorrow  
 at the sight, for never have I seen  
 another home surrounded in this way  
 with such harsh disaster. For I learned                                            
 of Agamemnon’s fate, the death he suffered  
 at his wife’s hand, as I steered my ship 
 towards Malea. [^note-411] The sailors’ prophet,  
 truthful Glaucus, Nereus’ seer, 
 told me from the waves. He placed himself  
 in open view and then said this to me:
“Menelaus, your brother’s lying dead—  
 collapsed inside his bath, the final one  
 his wife will give him.”  
His words made us,  
 me and my sailors, weep many tears.  
 When I touched land at Nauplia, with my wife                                
 already coming here, I was expecting  
 to give a loving greeting to Orestes, Agamemnon’s son, and to his mother.  
 I assumed that they were doing well.  
 But then I heard from some fisherman  
 about the profane murder of the child  
 of Tyndareus. Tell me now, you girls,  
 where he may be, Agamemnon’s son,  
 who dared this horrible atrocity.  
 For back then, when I left home for Troy,  
 he was a babe in Clytaemnestra’s arms.  
 So I wouldn’t know him if I saw him.  
  
[Orestes moves over unsteadily from his bed and crouches down in front of Menelaus]  
  
ORESTES  
 Menelaus, I am Orestes—the man                                                    
 you asked about. I’m willing to reveal  
 all the suffering I’ve been through. But first,  
 I clasp your knees in supplication,  
 and offer prayers from the mouth of a man  
 who holds no suppliant branch. [^note-412] Rescue me.  
 It’s the crucial moment of my suffering,  
 and you’ve arrived in person.  

MENELAUS  
 O gods,  
 what’s this I see? Which of the dead  
 am I now looking at?  

ORESTES  
 What you say is true. With the agony I’m in, I’m not alive,  
 though I see daylight.  

MENELAUS  
 You’re like a savage,  
 you poor man, with that tangled hair.  

ORESTES  
 It’s not my looks  
 which cause me grief. It’s what I’ve done.  

MENELAUS  
 Your ravaged eyes—  
 that look of yours is dreadful.  

ORESTES  
 My body’s gone.                                           
 But my name has not abandoned me.  

MENELAUS  
 You’re an unsightly mess—not what I expected.  

ORESTES  
 Here I am, my wretched mother’s killer.  

MENELAUS  
 So I’ve heard. Don’t talk about it—such evils  
 should be mentioned only sparingly.                                      
ORESTES  
 I’ll not say much. But the divine spirit  
 fills me with afflictions.  

MENELAUS  
 What’s wrong with you?  
 What’s the sickness that’s destroying you?  

ORESTES  
 It’s here—in my mind—because I’m aware  
 I’ve done something horrific. [^note-413]  

MENELAUS  
 What do you mean?  
 Wisdom comes from clarity. It’s not obscure.  

ORESTES  
 It’s the pain that’s truly destroying me.  

MENELAUS  
 She’s a fearful goddess, but there are cures.  

ORESTES  
 Mad fits—retribution for my mother’s blood.                                 

MENELAUS  
 When did this frenzy start? What day was it?                        
ORESTES  
 On the day I was raising up the mound  
 on my miserable mother’s grave.  

MENELAUS  
 Were you in the house or sitting down  
 keeping watch beside her fire?  

ORESTES  
 It was at night,  
 while I was waiting to collect the bones.  

MENELAUS  
 Was someone there as your support?  

ORESTES  
 Yes.  
 Pylades was there—he acted with me  
 in shedding blood, my mother’s murder.  

MENELAUS  
 You’re sick from phantom apparitions.  
 What are they like?  

ORESTES  
 I thought I saw three girls— they looked like Night.  

MENELAUS  
 I know the ones you mean.  
 But I have no wish to speak their names.  

ORESTES  
 No. They incite awe. You acted properly                                         
 in not mentioning them.  

MENELAUS  
 Are they the ones  
 driving you insane family murder?  

ORESTES  
 How miserably I suffer their attacks  

MENELAUS  
 But harsh suffering is not unusual  
 for those who carry out such dreadful acts.  

ORESTES  
 But we do have a way out of our troubles.  

MENELAUS  
 Don’t talk of death—that’s not wise.  

ORESTES  
 It was Phoebus who ordered me to carry out the act,  
 my mother’s murder.  

MENELAUS  
 Showing his ignorance  
 of what’s good and right.  

ORESTES  
 We are mere slaves  
 to the gods, whatever the gods are.  

MENELAUS  
 In this suffering of yours does Loxias  
 offer some relief?  

ORESTES  
 He’s planning to.                                               
 That’s the nature of the gods.  

MENELAUS  
 And your mother—  
 how long is it since she stopped breathing?  

ORESTES  
 This is the sixth day. Her burial fires  
 are still warm.  

MENELAUS  
 How quickly the goddesses came for you because of your mother’s blood.  

ORESTES  
 God is not wise, but by nature he is true  
 to those who are his friends. [^note-414]  

MENELAUS  
 And your father—  
 does he help you out for avenging him?  

ORESTES  
 Not yet. And if he’s still intending to,  
 I call that the same as doing nothing.  

MENELAUS  
 After what you’ve done how do you stand  
 with the city?  

ORESTES  
 I am so despised  
 that people will not talk to me.  

MENELAUS  
 Have you cleansed  
 your hands of blood in the appropriate way?                          
ORESTES  
 No. Wherever I go, doors are shut to me.                                        

MENELAUS  
 Which citizens are forcing you to leave?  

ORESTES  
 Oeax, who holds my father responsible  
 for that hateful war at Troy.  

MENELAUS  
 I see.  
 He seeks revenge for Palamedes’ murder. [^note-415]  

ORESTES  
 I had no part of that—I’m being killed,  
 but that death is two removes from me.  

MENELAUS  
 Who else?  
 Some of Aegisthus’ friends, I imagine?  

ORESTES  
 They slander me. Now the city listens.  

MENELAUS  
 Agamemnon’s sceptre—does the city let you keep it?  

ORESTES  
 How could they do that?  
 They won’t let me stay alive.  

MENELAUS  
 What will they do?  
 Can you give me a definite idea?  

ORESTES  
 Today there’ll be a vote against us.                                                   

MENELAUS  
 For you to leave the city? Or a vote  
 to kill or spare you?  

ORESTES  
 For death by stoning  
 by all the citizens.  

MENELAUS  
 Why not escape—  
 flee across the border?  

ORESTES  
 We’re surrounded  
 by soldiers, fully armed.  

MENELAUS  
 Private enemies    
 or by a force of Argives?  

ORESTES  
 The whole city— to make sure I die. There’s no more to say.     

MENELAUS  
 Poor wretch. You’re facing total disaster.  

ORESTES  
 My hope to get out of this emergency  
 rests on you. You’ve come loaded with success.  
 So share your prosperity with your friends                                      
 in desperate straits. Don’t accept the benefits  
 and keep them for yourself alone. Take on,  
 in your turn, a portion of these troubles,  
 paying back my father’s kindnesses for those  
 to whom you have an obligation. Those friends who, when misfortune comes, aren’t there to help  
 are friends in name but not in deed.  

[Enter Tyndareus with attendants]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Look—  
 the Spartan Tyndareus is coming here,  
 shuffling on his old legs, wearing black robes,  
 with short hair, in mourning for his daughter.  

ORESTES  
 I’m done for, Menelaus. Look at this—  
 Tyndareus is coming up to us.                                                          
 I feel particularly ashamed to come  
 into his sight because of what I’ve done.  
 For he raised me when I was still a child. He filled my life with love and carried me,  
 the child of Agamemnon, in his arms.  
 And Leda did the same. They honoured me  
 no less than they did those twins from Zeus. [^note-416]  
 O my miserable heart and spirit!  
 I have not paid them back a good return.  
 What darkness can I find to hide my face?  
 What sort of cloud can I set in front of me  
 to escape the eyes of that old man? 

[Tyndareus and his attendants move up to the palace]  

TYNDAREUS  
 Where can I catch a glimpse of Menelaus,     
 my daughter’s husband? Where? I was pouring  
 libations on the grave of Clytaemnestra  
 when I heard he’d arrived at Nauplia  
 with his wife, home safe after all these years.  
 Take me to him. I want to stand beside him,  
 on his right hand, and greet him as a friend  
 whom I’m seeing again after all these years.  

MENELAUS  
 Welcome, old man whose head shared the same bed  
 as Zeus himself.  

TYNDAREUS 
 Welcome to you, too,  
 Menelaus, my kinsman. Ah, it’s bad we don’t know what it is the future brings.  
 Here’s that dragon snake who killed his mother,  
 right outside the house, with his eyes flashing                                
 that sick glitter—an abomination to me.  
 Menelaus, you’re not talking to him,  
 not to that impious wretch?  

MENELAUS  
 Why would I not?  
 He’s the son of a father whom I loved.  

TYNDAREUS  
 His natural son? And he turned out like this?  

MENELAUS  
 Yes, he’s his son by birth. If he’s in trouble,  
 I must respect him.  

TYNDAREUS  
 You’re a barbarian— you’ve been so long among the savages.  

MENELAUS  
 In Greece we always honour relatives.  

TYNDAREUS  
 And we don’t wish to be above the law.  

MENELAUS  
 But among those with some intelligence  
 anything that’s forced is something slavish.  

TYNDAREUS  
 You hold to that. I’ll not subscribe to it.  

MENELAUS  
 Your anger and old age are not being wise.  

TYNDAREUS  
 What’s a dispute about such foolishness  
 have to do with him? If what’s good or bad  
 is plain to all, who has been more stupid than this fellow? He didn’t figure out  
 what justice required. Nor did he turn to  
 the common practices among the Greeks.  
 When Agamemnon took his final breath,  
 after my daughter struck him on his head—  
 a shameful act, which I never will defend—  
 he should have gone after just punishment                                     
 for bloodshed and followed what’s appropriate  
 in our religion, throwing his mother  
 out of the house. He would’ve won himself, instead of this disaster, some credit   
 for moderation. And he’d have followed  
 the law and been a righteous man. But now,  
 he’s come to the same fate as his mother.  
 He was right to think that she was wicked,  
 but he’s made himself more evil killing her.  
 I’ll ask you this question, Menelaus.  
 If a man’s wedded wife should murder him  
 and the son, in his turn, killed his mother,                                     
 and after that the son pay for the murder with his death, where will these disasters end?  
 Our ancestors dealt with these issues well.  
 They did not let a man with bloody hands  
 come in their sight or cross their path. Instead,  
 they purified him, not by killing him  
 as a punishment, no, they banished him.  
 Otherwise, the man who has pollution  
 on his hands last is always going to face  
 his own murder. I hate an evil woman,                                      
 especially my daughter who slaughtered      
 her own husband. And I’ll never approve  
 of Helen, your wife, or even speak to her.  
 I don’t think much of your voyage to Troy  
 for the sake of that worthless woman.  
 But with all my power I’ll defend the law  
 to put an end to this bestial killing,  
 which always destroys the land and city.  

[Tyndareus moves up to Orestes]  

 You miserable creature, what was in your mind  
 when your mother exposed her breasts to you    
 and begged? I did not see that dreadful sight, but still my ancient eyes dissolve in tears.  
 And there’s one thing which supports my case—                           
 the gods do hate you, and you’re being punished  
 for your mother with roaming fits of fear  
 and madness. Why do I need to attend to  
 other witnesses, when I can see it  
 for myself? So you should keep this in mind,  
 Menelaus—don’t act against the gods  
 by wanting to assist this man. Let him 
 be stoned to death by the citizens, or else don’t set foot on Spartan land.  
 My daughter’s dead. And that deed was just.  
 But she should not have died at that man’s hand.  
 I was born a fortunate man in all things                                           
 except my daughters. There I’ve been unlucky.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 The man who’s fortunate in his children,  
 who does not get ones which bring on him  
 notorious trouble—that’s a man to envy.  

ORESTES  
 I’m afraid to talk to you, old man,  
 at a time when I’m bound to pain your heart. Let your age, which hinders me from speaking,  
 be set aside, and I’ll proceed. But now,  
 your gray hair makes me too hesitant.  
 I know my mother’s murder has made me  
 unholy, and yet, in another sense,  
 a pious man who avenged his father.                                               
 What should I have done? Set these two things  
 against each other. My father planted me,  
 your daughter bore me—she was the plough land 
 who received the seed from someone else. Without a father there would never be  
 a child. I reasoned that I ought to take  
 the side of the one who gave me being,  
 rather than the woman who undertook  
 to raise me. Now your daughter—I’m ashamed  
 to call her mother—went to a man’s bed  
 in a private and an unwise marriage.  
 When I say bad things against her, I speak  
 against myself, but nonetheless I will.                                             
 At home Aegisthus was her secret husband. I killed the man, and then I sacrificed  
 my mother. I did an unholy act,  
 but I did get vengeance for my father.  
 As for the reasons you now threaten me  
 with death by stoning, you should listen to  
 how I am benefiting all of Greece.  
 If women grow so bold they start to kill  
 their husbands and then seek to find safety  
 with their children, fishing for sympathy    
 with their breasts, they’d start killing husbands for any reason and would pay no price.                                           
 You claim I committed a dreadful crime,  
 but I’ve put an end to practices like that.  
 I hated my mother and killed her justly.  
 She betrayed her husband, who was away  
 with the army, commander of all Greeks,  
 and didn’t keep his bed free of dishonour.  
 When she understood the mistake she’d made  
 she didn’t face up to the penalty.  
 No. In order to escape being punished, she murdered my father. By the gods!  
 It’s not a good thing to recall the gods  
 in a defence against a charge of murder,  
 but if by saying nothing I endorsed                                                  
 my mother’s act, what would the murdered man  
 have done to me? Would he now hate me  
 and terrify me with his band of Furies?  
 Or does my mother have those goddesses  
 as her allies, but he does not, although  
 he’s the one who’s been more greatly wronged. You’ve destroyed me, old man—yes, you have—  
 you’re the father of a wicked daughter.  
 Thanks to her outrageous act, I have lost  
 a father and become my mother’s killer.  
 You notice Telemachus did not kill  
 Odysseus’ wife, for she did not marry  
 husband after husband, and in their home                                      
 their bedroom remained quite unpolluted.  
 Do you see Apollo, who makes his home     
 at earth’s navel stone and gives mortal men the clearest spoken words, whom we obey  
 in all he says—I was obeying him  
 when I killed my mother. Call him impious,  
 and kill him. It was his mistake, not mine.  
 What should I have done? Or is the god  
 not good enough to cleanse me of my crime  
 when I turn to him? Where else can one flee,  
 if he who commanded me to do it  
 cannot rescue me from death? So don’t say 
 this action was not done appropriately,      
 but rather that it didn’t work out well  
 for those who did it. Among mortal men,  
 when marriages are properly set up,  
 their life is blessed. But those whose marriages  
 fall out badly have no luck, indoors and out.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Women by nature always interfere  
 in the affairs of men, with bad results.  

TYNDAREUS  
 Since you speak so boldly and hide nothing,  
 but give me answers which will pain my heart,  
 you’ll spur me on to bring about your death. I’ll count that as an extra benefit                                                     
 in the work for which I came here, to dress  
 my daughter’s grave. I’ll go to the Argives,  
 to their assembly, set them against you  
 and your sister, against their will or not—  
 you’ll pay the penalty, death by stoning.  
 She deserves to die even more than you.  
 She incited you against your mother,  
 always carrying stories for your ears 
 to make you hate her more, reporting dreams of Agamemnon and her sexual life  
 with Aegisthus—may gods below the earth  
 despise it—it was bitter up here, too,                                              
 until she set the house ablaze with flames  
 not kindled by Hephaestus. I tell you this,  
 Menelaus, and I will do it, too.  
 So if you give my hatred any weight  
 and my relationship to you through marriage,  
 don’t act in opposition to the gods—  
 do not protect this man from death. Leave him for the citizens to kill by stoning,  
 or don’t set foot on Spartan land. Listen,  
 and understand this well. You must not choose  
 ungodly men as friends, pushing aside  
 the ones who act more righteously. You men,  
 lead me away. Take me from this house.  

[Tyndareus and his attendants leave]  

ORESTES  
 Well, be off with you, so that what I say                                          
 may reach this man without interruption,  
 quite free from your old age. Menelaus,  
 why are you walking around, lost in thought, going back and forth, as if quite divided  
 in what you’re thinking?  

MENELAUS  
 Leave me alone.  
 I’m debating with myself. I’m not sure  
 which course of action I should follow.  

ORESTES  
 Don’t decide on what seems to be the case.  
 First listen to the things I have to say  
 and then make up your mind.  

MENELAUS  
 You’re right. Speak up.  
 There are times when silence may be better, 
 but there are also times when speaking    
 is preferable to silence.  

ORESTES  
 Then I’ll speak. A long speech is better than a short one                                          
 and it’s much clearer for the listener, too.  
 You don’t have to give me anything of yours,  
 Menelaus, just pay back what you took, 
 what you got from my father—not property,  
 that’s not what I mean. If you save my life,  
 that’s the dearest thing I own. I’ve done wrong.  
 To counter this bad act, I have to get  
 an unjust deed from you, for my father,  
 Agamemnon, did wrong when he gathered those Greeks to go to Troy, and not because  
 he made mistakes himself, no, but to heal                                       
 the error and injustice of your wife. [^note-417]  
 And for this one act you should pay me back.  
 For he willingly sacrificed his life,  
 as family members should for those they love,  
 toiling hard in battle right beside you,  
 so you could have your wife back. Pay me back  
 in the same way for what you received there,  
 working hard for just one day, not ten years. Stand up, and save me. As for what Aulis took  
 with my sister slaughtered as a sacrifice,  
 I’ll let you have that. You don’t have to kill  
 Hermione. For in my present plight,                  
 you must have the upper hand. That I grant.  
 But offer my poor father my own life  
 and my sister’s. For a long time now                                               
 she’s been unmarried, and if I die,  
 I’ll leave my father’s house without an heir.  
 You’ll say it can’t be done. But that’s the point. Kinsmen must help their friends when things are bad.  
 When fortune gives success, what need of friends?  
 When god is keen to help, then his assistance  
 is quite sufficient. All of Greece believes  
 you love your wife—and I’m not saying this                                    
 to win your favour with mere flattery—  
 but I am appealing to you in her name.  
 O this wretched situation I am in!  
 How did I get into something like this?  
 What then? Well, I have to go through with it. I’m making this appeal for my whole house.  
 O uncle, you’re brother to my father.  
 Imagine if, from his grave, the dead man  
 is listening to this and if his spirit  
 is hovering above you and saying  
 what I say with these laments and tears  
 in this misfortune. I’ve given my speech  
 and pleaded to be saved, chasing after  
 what all men seek, not just myself alone.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Although I’m just a woman, I too beg you      
 to help these people when they’re in such need.  
 You have the power to do that.  

MENELAUS  
 Orestes,  
 I do respect you, and I want to share  
 these troubles with you. Besides, it’s right  
 to help one’s family members in bad times,  
 if god gives one the power, by killing  
 their enemies and even dying oneself.  
 I need to get that power from the gods.  
 I’m here without a group of fighting spearmen,  
 after roaming through thousands of troubles with the small help of my surviving friends.                                    
 In any fight we could not overcome  
 Pelasgian Argos. If we could prevail  
 with reassuring words, then that’s where  
 I’d place my hopes. For how can any man  
 achieve great things with small resources?  
 It’s foolishness to even wish for that.  
 For when people fall into a frenzy  
 it’s like a blazing fire, hard to put out.  
 If one, in responding to the tension, gently eases off one’s grip, backs away,  
 and times things right, it may blow itself out.  
 If the winds die down, you could easily get                                      
 whatever you want from them. For people  
 do have pity, as well as their great passion,  
 a quality of utmost value to the man  
 who looks for it. And so on your behalf  
 I’ll go and try to convince Tyndareus  
 and the city to act on their passions                                           
 wisely. For a ship can take on water if the sheet is pulled too tight, but if 
 one eases off the rope, then that ship  
 will once more right itself. The god does hate  
 excessive zeal, as do the citizens.  
 I must save you—I don’t deny the fact—  
 but by using cleverness, not by force                                               
 against a stronger group. I’d not save you  
 with power alone, as you perhaps may think.  
 It’s not easy to take a stand and win 
 with a single spear against the troubles which afflict you. It never was my style  
 to try to soften up the Argive state,  
 but now it must be done—the wise man  
 is a slave to circumstance.  

[Menelaus and his attendants leave]  

ORESTES  
 You’re useless,  
 except to head up an expedition  
 for a woman’s sake, the worst of men  
 in helping out your friends. Are you turning  
 your back on me and running off,                                                    
 so Agamemnon’s cause has disappeared?  
 O father, once things have turned out badly you have no friends. Alas, I’ve been betrayed,  
 and there’s no longer any hope for me  
 of turning somewhere and escaping death  
 at Argive hands. For that Menelaus  
 was my refuge, my way of being saved.  

[Pylades enters]  

 But I see Pylades, my greatest friend,  
 rushing here from Phocis. A welcome sight!  
 A man who can be trusted in hard times  
 is finer to behold than tranquil waters  
 for men at sea. 

PYLADES  
 I’ve come through the city, and I had to move quickly once I heard                                           
 and clearly witnessed for myself the crowds  
 of citizens gathering there against you  
 and your sister so they can kills you both  
 without delay. What’s going on? How are you?  
 What are you doing? Of people my own age,  
 friends and relatives, you are my favourite.  
 You’re all those things to me.  

ORESTES  
 I am done for—  
 those few words make clear to you my troubles.                        

PYLADES  
 Then you must do away with me as well. Friends share things in common.  

ORESTES  
 Menelaus  
 is the worst of men to me and to my sister.  

PYLADES  
 It’s natural enough that any man  
 with a bad wife should grow bad himself.  

ORESTES  
 His coming here was as much help to me  
 as if he hadn’t come.  

PYLADES  
 So it’s true then  
 that he’s arrived and landed here?  

ORESTES  
 He took a while, but in no time at all                                               
 showed he was an enemy to his friends.  

PYLADES  
 That wife of his—the nastiest of women— did he bring her on his ship?  

ORESTES  
 No, not him.  
 She’s the one who brought him here.  

PYLADES  
 Where is she, that one woman who destroyed  
 all those Achaeans?  

ORESTES  
 She’s in my home—  
 if it’s all right to call it mine.  

PYLADES 
 What did you say  
 to your father’s brother?  

ORESTES  
 Not to just look on  
 while the townsfolk killed me and my sister.  

PYLADES  
 By the gods, how did he respond to you?  
 That I’d like to know.  

ORESTES  
 He was cautious—  
 the way false friends act with their families.                           
PYLADES  
 What sort of excuses did he offer?  
 Once I know that, I’ll understand it all.  

ORESTES  
 That man arrived—the one who has produced                                
 those splendid daughters.  

PYLADES  
 Ah, you mean Tyndareus.  
 I suppose he was all worked up at you  
 for his daughter’s sake?  

ORESTES  
 Yes, you have that right.  
 And Menelaus preferred family ties  
 with him instead of with my father.  

PYLADES  
 So when he was here he lacked the courage  
 to share your troubles.  

ORESTES                      
 No. He wasn’t born a warrior. He’s brave among the women.  

PYLADES  
 So you’re in the gravest danger and must die?  

ORESTES  
 The citizens must cast their votes on us  
 about the murder.  

PYLADES  
 What must the vote decide?  
 Tell me. I’m growing fearful.  

ORESTES  
 For life or death—  
 it’s not something that takes much time to say  
 though it involves something that lasts forever.  

PYLADES  
 Leave the palace now, flee with your sister.  

ORESTES  
 Do you not see how we are both being watched,                            
 with armed guards on every side?  

PYLADES  
 I noticed streets in town blocked off by men with weapons.  

ORESTES  
 We’re physically hemmed in, like a city 
 by its enemies.  

PYLADES  
 You must ask me now 
 how I am doing, for I, too am quite destroyed.  

ORESTES  
 By whom? This would add further disasters  
 to the ones I face.  

PYLADES  
 Strophius, my father, 
 has banished me—he was so furious  
 he sent me from the house.  

ORESTES  
 What’s the charge 
 he’s leveling against you, something private 
 or is it one the townsfolk share?  

PYLADES  
 He claims it’s an unholy sacrilege to help you  
 in murdering your own mother.  

ORESTES  
 That’s bad news.  
 It seems what’s hurting me is harming you, as well.      

PYLADES  
 It’s something I have to bear. I’ll not act 
 like Menelaus.  

ORESTES  
 But are you not afraid                                      
 Argos will want to kill you, just like me?  

PYLADES  
 I’m not theirs to punish. I’m from Phocis.  

ORESTES  
 The mob is nasty, when it has leaders  
 bent on doing wrong.  

PYLADES  
 But when it’s controlled  
 by decent men, the decisions they make are always good.  

ORESTES  
 All right. We must think this through,  
 working together.  

PYLADES  
 What must we do?  

ORESTES  
 What if I went and told the citizens . . .  

PYLADES [interrupting]  
. . . that what you did was just?  

ORESTES  
 I sought revenge  
 for my father’s sake?  

PYLADES  
 They might be happy  
 to grab hold of you.  

ORESTES  
 Am I to cower down  
 and die without a word?  

PYLADES                       
 That’s cowardly.  

ORESTES  
 Then what should I do?  

PYLADES  
 If you stayed here,  
 would you have a way of being rescued?  

ORESTES  
 No. I don’t have anything.  

PYLADES  
 And if you left, is there some hope you might be saved?  

ORESTES  
 Perhaps—                                     
 there might be.  

PYLADES  
 That’s better than staying here, then.  

ORESTES  
 All right, I’ll go.  

PYLADES  
 At least that way, if you die,  
 you’ll die more nobly. 

ORESTES  
 You’re right—this way  
 I won’t be a coward.  

PYLADES  
 More than staying here.  

ORESTES  
 And my action was right.  

PYLADES  
 Just make a prayer  
 that’s how it looks to them.  

ORESTES  
 And someone there  
 might pity me . . . 

PYLADES [interrupting]  
 Yes, your noble birth  
 is a great asset.  

ORESTES  
. . . being so upset  
 at my father’s death.  

PYLADES  
 All that’s easy to see.                                     
ORESTES  
 I have to go. It’s not a manly thing  
 to die a shameful death.  

PYLADES  
 I agree with you.  

ORESTES  
 Should we tell my sister?  

PYLADES  
 By the gods, no.  

ORESTES  
 There’d certainly be tears.  

PYLADES  
 That’d be a serious omen.  

ORESTES  
 It’s clear it’s better to say nothing.  

PYLADES  
 And you’ll save time.  

ORESTES  
 There’s just one problem for me.                                     

PYLADES  
 What now? Are you talking of something new?  

ORESTES  
 I’m worried the goddesses will stop me  
 with this madness.  

PYLADES  
 But I’ll take care of you.  

ORESTES  
 It’s unpleasant looking after someone sick.                            
PYLADES  
 Not to me. Not when I’m looking after you.  

ORESTES  
 Be careful you don’t start my madness.  

PYLADES  
 Don’t worry over that.  

ORESTES         
 You won’t hold back?  

PYLADES  
 It’s a great evil to hold back with friends.  

ORESTES  
 Then, you pilot of my steps, let’s go now.  

PYLADES  
 That’s a service I’m glad to undertake.  

ORESTES          
 And lead me to my father’s tomb.  

PYLADES  
 Why there?  

ORESTES  
 So I may appeal to him to save me.  

PYLADES  
 That’s the righteous thing to do.                       

ORESTES  
 May I not glimpse 
 the memorial to my mother!  

PYLADES  
 No, not that. She was your enemy. But you must hurry—  
 the vote the Argives cast may catch you first.  
 Lean your side that’s weakened by disease                                      
 against my side, so I can carry you 
 through town. I won’t be worrying about  
 the crowds or feeling any sense of shame.  
 For how can I show I’m a friend of yours  
 if I don’t help when you’re in serious trouble?  

ORESTES  
 That’s the point. Make sure you get good comrades    
 and not just relatives. A man may be from somewhere else, but if he bonds with you  
 in how you act, then he’s a better friend,  
 than a thousand members of one’s family.  

[Pylades and Orestes leave]  

CHORUS  
 That great prosperity and lofty name  
 so proudly celebrated throughout Greece  
 and there beside the waters of the Simois  
 has declined once more from the success                                         
 of Atreus’ sons so many years ago—  
 from an old misfortune in their house,  
 when strife came to the sons of Tantalus about a golden ram, the saddest feasts  
 and slaughter of children nobly born,  
 that’s why murder moves on to murder  
 through blood and does not leave alone  
 the double line of Atreus. [^note-418]  

 What’s good is not good, to slice up                                                  
 a parent’s flesh with metal forged in fire  
 and to display in the sun’s light a sword  
 stained black with murdered blood. To commit   
 a virtuous crime is sheer profanity, the mad delusion of wrong-thinking men.  
 The wretched daughter of Tyndareus,  
 terrified of death, screamed at him, “My child,  
 don’t you dare carry out such sacrilege  
 and slaughter your own mother—in honouring  
 your father, don’t tie yourself to such disgrace,  
 such shame which lasts for an eternity.”                                          

 What affliction or distress, what agony  
 in all the earth surpasses this, to have 
 on one’s own hands a mother’s murdered blood? For undertaking such a act, the man  
 has been driven into fits of madness,  
 prey hunted by the Kindly Ones, his eyes  
 rolling in her whirling blood, the son  
 of Agamemnon. The miserable wretch,                                           
 when he saw his mother’s breast appear  
 above her dress, a robe of woven gold,  
 he made his own mother a sacrifice    
 to avenge the sufferings of his father.  

[Enter Electra from the house]  

ELECTRA  
 You women, has poor Orestes left the house,   overcome by that madness from the gods?  

CHORUS LEADER  
 No. He’s gone to the people in Argos,  
 to give himself up for the vote they’ve set,  
 in which you two must live or die.  

ELECTRA  
 Alas! Why did he do that? Who convinced him?  

[A Messenger appears, coming toward the house]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Pylades did. But this messenger, it seems,                                      
 will soon tell us news about your brother,  
 what happened to him there.  

MESSENGER  
 You poor girl,  
 unhappy daughter of Agamemnon,  
 our army’s leader, lady Electra, hear the disastrous news I bring you.  

ELECTRA  
 Alas! We’re finished! Your words are clear enough—  
 you’ve come, it seems, with disastrous news.  

MESSENGER  
 Pelasgians have, in their vote, decreed  
 that you, unhappy lady, are to die,  
 you and your brother on this very day. [^note-419]  

ELECTRA  
 Alas! What I been expecting has arrived—  
 I’ve been afraid of it a long time now,                                              
 dissolved in sorrow for what might come true.  
 How was the trial? What did the Argives say to convict us and ratify our deaths?  
 Tell me, old man, whether my life will end  
 by stoning or a sword—for I do share  
 in those misfortunes of my brother?  

MESSENGER  
 I happened to be coming from the country  
 and was coming through the gates—I wanted  
 to find out about you and Orestes.  
 I always liked your father, and your house  
 gave me food. I was poor but honourable                                       
 in helping out my friends. I saw a crowd going up and sitting on the higher ground  
 where, they say, Danaus first gathered up  
 his people and they sat down together  
 to judge the charge against him by Aegyptus. [^note-420]  
 Seeing the crowd, I asked a citizen,  
 What’s new in Argos? Has some news report  
 about an enemy caused a great stir  
 in this city of Danaus’ descendants?  
 He said, “Don’t you see Orestes coming,  
 rushing to a trial where his life’s at stake.” Then I saw something I did not expect—  
 how I wish I’d never seen it!—Pylades                                              
 and your brother moving there together,  
 one with his head down and doubled over  
 by his infirmity and the other,  
 like a brother, sharing his friend’s troubles,  
 caring for his sickness as if he were  
 schooling a young boy. Once the Argives  
 had gathered in a crowd, a herald stood 
 and cried, “Who desires to make a speech whether Orestes should be killed or not  
 for his mother’s murder?” Talthybius stood,  
 the man who helped your father demolish  
 those Phrygians. [^note-421] He spoke ambiguously—  
 well, he’s always been a subordinate  
 of those in power—praising your father                                           
 but saying nothing good about your brother,  
 weaving good and misleading words together,  
 claiming it would be setting up bad laws  
 concerning parents, and all the time he kept looking at Aegisthus’ friends  
 with those bright eyes of his. The herald tribe  
 is like that—they’re always jumping over  
 to the side of the successful. Any man  
 who has ruling power in the city 
 is a friend of theirs. After he’d finished,  
 lord Diomedes spoke. He was against                                              
 killing you or your brother but proposed  
 they act with reverence and as punishment    
 use exile. Some of the people there roared out that what he’d said was good, but then others  
 didn’t favour the idea. But after that,  
 a man stood up who can’t keep his mouth shut,  
 whose strength comes from his boldness—an Argive,  
 but not from Argos—and forced himself on us  
 relying on bluster, ignorant free speech,  
 persuasive enough to get them involved  
 in some bad scheme or other. When a man  
 with bad intentions but a pleasing style  
 persuades a mob, that’s a great disaster for the city, but those who always give                                            
 useful, sound advice, even if their words  
 are not immediately appropriate,  
 are beneficial later to the state.  
 That’s how one should view a party leader—  
 what happens with a man who gives a speech  
 is much the same as with a man in office.  
 Well, this man said that you and Orestes  
 should be stoned to death. But Tyndareus  
 was the one who laid down the arguments the speaker used to urge you both be killed.  
 Another man stood up opposing him.  
 He wasn’t much to look at physically,  
 but the man had courage. He rarely came  
 into the city and the market place.  
 He was a farmer—they’re the only ones                                           
 who keep our country going—but clever  
 and keen to wrestle with the argument,  
 someone with integrity, who lived a life                                    
 beyond reproach. He said they should crown Orestes, Agamemnon’s son, who wished  
 to avenge his father, who’d been murdered  
 by an abominable, godless woman—  
 she’d stop men taking up their weapons  
 and fighting foreign wars, if those people  
 who stayed behind corrupted things at home  
 by abusing the men’s wives. What he said  
 appeared convincing, at least to decent folk.                                   
 There were no other speakers. Your brother 
 then came up and said, “You who are the heirs of Inachus, who were Pelasgians  
 so long ago, then sons of Danaus,  
 I was fighting on your behalf, no less  
 than for my father, when I killed my mother.  
 For if the fact that women murder men  
 is permitted, you’ll be dead in no time,  
 or else we’ll have to be the women’s slaves—  
 and you’ll be doing the very opposite  
 of what you should be doing. As it is,  
 the woman who betrayed my father’s bed is dead, but if you execute me now,                                                 
 the law would be relaxed, and men will die  
 as fast as possible—there’ll be no lack  
 of such audacity.” His speech was good,  
 but he could not convince the crowd. Instead,  
 the verdict of the entire group was for  
 the nasty rogue who spoke out in favour  
 of executing you and your brother.  
 Poor Orestes just managed to persuade them   
 not to stone him to death, by promising to end his life, to die by his own hand, 
 along with you, as well, this very day.  
 Pylades, in tears, is bringing him here  
 from the assembly. His friends are coming,                                     
 weeping and lamenting. This spectacle,  
 so painful for you, is heading this way,  
 a distressing sight. Get your swords ready  
 or a noose around your neck—you must leave  
 the light. Your noble birth has been no help.  
 Nor has Phoebus in Delphi, seated there on his tripod. Instead he has destroyed you.  

[The Messenger leaves]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 O you unfortunate girl, you’re speechless,  
 with your clouded face bent toward the ground, 
 as if you’ll rush to cry and make laments.  

ELECTRA  
 O Pelasgia, now I start to weep,                                                       
 pushing white nails through my cheeks,  
 blood lacerations, and striking my head,  
 actions appropriate to Persephone,  
 lovely child goddess of the world below.  
 Let the Cyclopian land now wail aloud the sorrows of this house, setting iron  
 against its head to shave it close. [^note-422]  
 Pity, yes, pity now comes forward  
 for those who are about to die,  
 once war leaders of the Greeks.                                                        

 It’s gone—the entire race of Pelops,  
 passed away and gone, all the glory  
 that once made it a blessed house.  
 Envy from the gods seized them— 
 and that hateful vote for blood among the citizens. Alas, alas,  
 you tribes of men bowed down with work,  
 who live a brief life full of tears,  
 see how Fate moves to thwart your hopes.  
 As time run on at length, different men  
 take turns with different troubles,                                                   
 and all of human life remains uncertain.  

 If only I could reach that boulder  
 hanging in the winds on chains of gold  
 mid way between the earth and heaven, that fragment carried from Olympus,  
 so I could shout out my laments  
 to old father Tantalus, who sired  
 and made my house’s ancestors.  
 the ones who witnessed such disasters—  
 the race of flying horses, when Pelops  
 in a four-horse chariot raced to the sea                                            
 and murdered Myrtilus by hurling him  
 into the ocean swell, driving his chariot  
 near Geraestus, where the surging sea foams white along the shore. [^note-423]  
 From that there came upon my house  
 a dreadful curse, when Maia’s son  
 arranged a birth within the flocks,  
 the lamb with a fleece of gold,  
 ominous portent of the ruin  
 of horse-breeding Atreus.                                                                 
 Because of that, Strife then reversed  
 Sun’s winged chariot to a western path  
 across the sky by placing under yoke the snow-white horses of the Dawn  
 and Zeus changed onto another path  
 the moving seven-tracked Pleiades. [^note-424]  
 Death followed death at that banquet  
 to which Thyestes gave his name  
 and the bed of Aerope from Crete,  
 a traitor in her deceitful marriage. [^note-425]  
 The final chapter comes with me  
 and with my father in these troubles,  
 all these afflictions laid on our house.                                     
[Pylades and Orestes enter]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Look, here comes your brother, condemned to die  
 by general vote, and with him Pylades,  
 the truest of all men, like a brother,  
 guiding his sick limbs, treading carefully  
 like a pace horse giving its support.  

ELECTRA  
 Alas! My brother, I’m seeing you here  
 before your tomb, confronting face to face  
 the gates of those below, and I weep.  
 Alas, once more! This last sight of you                                            
 before my eyes will make me lose my mind.                           
ORESTES  
 Why can’t you just be quiet and finish off  
 these womanish laments for what’s been done?  
 It’s pitiful, but still you must endure  
 the circumstances we now face.  

ELECTRA  
 But how  
 can I stay silent? We poor sufferers  
 will no longer see the sun god’s light.  

ORESTES  
 Don’t be so tedious. It’s quite enough  
 that I’ll be suffering a wretched death  
 at Argive hands. So just set aside  
 your present sorrow.  

ELECTRA  
 Alas for your sad youth, Orestes, and for your early death.  
 You should live on, but now you’ll be no more.                              

ORESTES  
 By the gods, you’ll strip me of my manhood—  
 by bringing our calamities to mind  
 you’ll have me crying.  

ELECTRA  
 We’re going to die.  
 It’s impossible not to grieve for that.  
 It’s pitiful. To all men life is sweet. 

ORESTES  
 This is our appointed day. So we must  
 sharpen a sword or fix a hanging noose.  

ELECTRA  
 Then you kill me, my brother, so no Argive   executes me and starts hurling insults  
 at Agamemnon’s children.  

ORESTES  
 I won’t kill you.  
 It’s enough to have my mother’s blood on me.  
 No. You must die by your own hand somehow—                           
 in whatever way you wish.  

ELECTRA  
 All right, then.  
 I won’t lag behind you with my sword.  
 But I want to hug you around your neck  

ORESTES  
 Enjoy that empty pleasure, if embraces  
 bring any joy to those about to die.  

ELECTRA [embracing Orestes]  
 O my dearest one! O that longed-for name,   so very sweet to your own sister—  
 whose spirit is one with yours.  

ORESTES  
 You’ll melt my heart.  
 I want to respond to you with loving arms.  
 And why should a wretch like me still feel shame?  

[Orestes embraces Electra]  

 Ah, my sister’s heart, how I love holding you!  
 For us in our misery these pleasures                                                
 replace our children and a marriage bed.  

ELECTRA  
 If only the same sword could kill us both,  
 if that’s permitted, and one burial chamber   
 made of cedar wood receive us both.  
ORESTES  
 That would be very sweet. But you do see  
 we’re short of friends who’d let us share a tomb.  

ELECTRA  
 Did that coward Menelaus, the one  
 who betrayed my father, not speak out  
 on your behalf, making some attempt  
 to stop you being killed?  

ORESTES  
 Not at all—  
 he didn’t even show his face. His hopes  
 were on the sceptre, so he was careful  
 not to save the members of his family.  
 But come now, as we move to our deaths     
 let’s act bravely, in a way that’s worthy  
 of Agamemnon. So I, for my part,  
 will show the city I am nobly born,  
 when I push the sword into my liver.  
 You, in turn, must match my courage.  
 Pylades, you must supervise our deaths—  
 when we’re dead, dress our bodies properly.  
 Carry them to our father’s burial mound  
 and bury us together. So farewell.  
 I’m on my way to do it, as you see.                                          
[Orestes starts to move into the house]  

PYLADES  
 Hold on! There’s first something I blame you for—  
 if you believed I’d want to go on living                                            
 after you were dead.  

ORESTES  
 Why is it right  
 that you should die with me?  

PYLADES  
 You’re asking that?  
 How can I live without you as my friend?  

ORESTES  
 You didn’t kill your mother, as I did,  
 to my misfortune.  

PYLADES  
 I acted with you.  
 For that I should have to suffer something.                   

ORESTES  
 Surrender your body to your father.  
 Don’t die with me. You still have a city. I do not. You have your father’s house  
 and the safety of great wealth. You failed  
 to marry my poor sister, as I promised  
 out of a sense of our companionship.  
 But you must take another marriage bed                                         
 and have children. The family bonds we had  
 no longer hold with you and me. Be happy,  
 beloved face of my great friend. For us            
 that is impossible, but you can be—  
 we dead lack any sources of delight.                                       
PYLADES  
 How far you are from understanding  
 what my intentions are. May fruitful earth  
 refuse to take my blood and the bright sky  
 my spirit, if ever I betray you,  
 if I let myself go free and leave you.  
 I did the murder, too. I don’t deny it.  
 And I planned all those things for which you now                           
 are paying the penalty. And so I must  
 go to my death along with you and her.  
 Since I consented to the marriage, I consider her my wife. What would I say  
 if I ever came to the land of Delphi,  
 and reached the high citadel of Phocis,  
 if I’d been your friend before your troubles  
 but was no longer any friend of yours  
 now you’re in this distress? I can’t do that.  
 I’m involved in this, as well. Since we’ll die  
 let’s see if we can find a way together  
 to make Menelaus miserable as well.  

ORESTES  
 My dearest friend, if only I could see    
 something like that before I die.  

PYLADES  
 Then listen.  
 You must postpone this sword blow.  

ORESTES  
 I will,  
 if I can get even with my enemy.  

PYLADES [indicating the Chorus]  
 Be quiet. I don’t have much confidence  
 in these women.  

ORESTES    
 Don’t worry about them.  
 These women here are friends of ours.  

PYLADES  
 Let’s murder Helen—for Menelaus  
 that would be a bitter pain.  

ORESTES  
 But how?  
 I’m prepared to do it, if there’s a chance   
 we’d pull it off.  

PYLADES  
 By hacking her to death. She’s hiding in your house.  

ORESTES  
 That’s true enough.  
 In fact, she’s stamping her seal on everything.  

PYLADES  
 Not any more. She’s engaged to Hades.  

ORESTES  
 How do we do it? She has attendants—                                          
 those barbarians.  

PYLADES  
 What do they matter?  
 I’m not afraid of any Phrygians.  

ORESTES  
 The kind of men who take care of mirrors  
 and look after perfumes! 

PYLADES  
 Did she come here  
 bringing the luxuries of Troy with her?  

ORESTES  
 Oh yes. For her Greece is too small a space to live in.  

PYLADES  
 The race of slaves is nothing  
 compared to those who’re free.  

ORESTES  
 If I do this,  
 I’m not afraid of dying twice.                   

PYLADES  
 Nor am I,  
 if I’m getting my revenge for you.  

ORESTES  
 Explain the plan—keep on describing  
 what you were talking about.  

PYLADES  
 We’ll go in,  
 inside the house, as if we’re on our way  
 to kill ourselves.  

ORESTES  
 I understand that part.                                          
 But I don’t get the rest.  

PYLADES  
 We’ll parade our grief  
 for what we’re suffering in front of her.                                   
ORESTES  
 So she’ll begin to weep, though on the inside 
 she’ll be overjoyed.  

PYLADES  
 Then the state she’s in  
 will match our own.  

ORESTES  
 After that, what do we do  
 according to our plan?  

PYLADES  
 We’ll have swords  
 hidden in our clothes.  

ORESTES  
 And her attendants—  
 do we kill them first?  

PYLADES  
 We’ll lock them up  
 in different places in the house  

ORESTES  
 And anyone  
 who won’t keep quiet we’ll have to kill.  

PYLADES 
 Once that’s done, the job itself will tell us  
 where we direct our efforts.  

ORESTES  
 Helen’s murder.    
 I know what that means.  

PYLADES  
 That’s right.  
 Now listen to how well I’ve planned this out.  
 If we drew our swords against a woman  
 with greater moderation, the killing  
 would be notorious, but as it is,  
 she’ll pay the penalty to all of Greece—  
 she killed their fathers, destroyed their children,  
 and robbed married women of their husbands—  
 there’ll be shouts of joy, people lighting fires  
 to the gods and calling many blessings down on you and me for carrying out the murder  
 of such an evil woman. With her death  
 you won’t be called “killer of your mother”—                                  
 you’ll move past that and find a better name.  
 They’ll call you killer of Helen, the one  
 who slaughtered thousands. It can’t be right,  
 it never would be right for Menelaus  
 to keep being successful while your father,  
 your sister, and yourself go to their deaths,  
 and your mother . . . but I’ll avoid that subject as something indelicate to mention,  
 or for him to have your house—after all,  
 it was thanks to Agamemnon’s spear  
 he got his wife back. May I stop living  
 if we don’t pull out our swords against her!  
 If we don’t succeed in killing Helen,  
 before we die we’ll set the house on fire.                                         
 We won’t fail to win at least one glory—  
 a noble death or a fine salvation.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Tyndareus’ daughter disgraced her sex and justly earned the hatred of all women.  

ORESTES  
 Ah me, a true friend—there’s nothing better,  
 not wealth or sovereignty. One cannot count  
 what one would exchange for a noble friend.  
 You’re the one who devised those nasty things  
 against Aegisthus, then stayed at my side  
 when danger threatened. And now once again                               
 you’re offering me a way of punishing  
 my enemies and are not running off.  
 But I’ll stop praising you—excessive praise can prove a burden. Now, in any case,  
 since my spirit is going to breathe its last,  
 I want to do something to my enemies  
 before I die, so I can demolish,  
 in their turn, those who were traitors to me  
 and make those who made me suffer grieve.  
 Yes, I was born son of Agamemnon,  
 who was considered worthy to rule Greece.  
 He was no tyrant yet had god-like strength.  
 I will not disgrace him, going to my death     
 as if I were a slave. No. My life force  
 I shall release quite freely. And I’ll take  
 revenge on Menelaus. If we could get  
 just one thing, we could get lucky—some way  
 to save ourselves despite all expectations  
 might fall our way from somewhere, so we’d kill  
 and not get killed ourselves. I pray for that.  
 It’s sweet to talk about what I desire  
 in words with wings which cheer my spirit  
 and don’t cost anything.  

ELECTRA  
 Brother, I think I’ve got the very thing you’re praying for,  
 a way of rescuing the three of us, 
 you, him, and me.  

ORESTES  
 You mean divine good will?  
 That can’t be it, because I know your mind                                     
 is too intelligent for that.  

ELECTRA  
 Just listen—  
 and you, Pylades, pay attention, too.  

ORESTES  
 All right, talk. The idea that there’s good news  
 makes me feel good.  

ELECTRA  
 You know Helen’s daughter?  
 Of course, you do.  

ORESTES  
 Yes, I know Hermione.  
 My mother raised her.  

ELECTRA  
 Well, she’s gone off to Clytaemnestra’s grave.  

ORESTES  
 What’s she doing there?  
 What hope are you suggesting?  

ELECTRA  
 She’s gone to pour  
 libations on our mother’s burial mound.  

ORESTES  
 How does what you’ve said help us to safety?  

ELECTRA  
 Seize her on her way back. Make her a hostage.  

ORESTES  
 We three here are friends—so what remedy                                    
 are you suggesting for us?  

ELECTRA  
 Once Helen’s dead,  
 if Menelaus tries to do something  
 to you or him or me—for this friendship  
 unites us all as one—tell him you’ll kill Hermione. You must pull out your sword  
 and hold it here, across the young girl’s throat.  
 Once Menelaus sees Helen collapsed  
 in her own blood, if he tries to save you,  
 because he doesn’t want the girl to die,  
 then let her father have Hermione back,  
 but if his passions get the best of him  
 and he seeks your death, cut the young girl’s neck.  
 I think he’ll put on quite a show at first,                                          
 but soon enough his temper will calm down. He’s not a bold courageous man by nature.  
 That’s the defence I have to rescue us.  
 That’s it. I’m finished.  

ORESTES  
 You’ve got a man’s heart,  
 though your body shows that you’re a woman.  
 How much more you deserve to stay alive  
 than die. Pylades, it would be bad luck  
 if you were to lose a woman like this,  
 but if you live, you’ll be a happy man  
 to share her marriage bed.  

PYLADES  
 I hope that happens.  
 May she come to the city of Phocis full honoured with fine wedding songs!                                           

ORESTES  
 How long before Hermione gets home?  
 All the things you said were really good,  
 provided we succeed in seizing her,  
 that whelp of a sacrilegious father.  

ELECTRA  
 I expect she’s already near the house,  
 judging from the length of time she’s taken.  

ORESTES  
 Good. Now, Electra, you remain right here.  
 Wait in front of the house for her return.  
 And keep an eye out, in case anyone— my uncle or one of his associates—  
 comes too near the house before the murder.                                  
 If so, make a signal to those inside,  
 by knocking on the door or sending word.  
 Pylades, we’ll go in and arm ourselves,  
 get swords in hand to finish this last fight—  
 you’ll help me in carrying out the work.  
 O father living at home in murky night,  
 your son Orestes is summoning you  
 to come and stand by those who need your help. In this distress I’m suffering injustice  
 for your sake. I’ve acted righteously,  
 but I’ve been betrayed by your own brother  
 Now I wish to take his wife and kill her—  
 be our accomplice in this act.                                                           

ELECTRA  
 O father,  
 do come, if from there beneath the earth  
 you hear the calls of your own children  
 who are dying for your sake.  

PYLADES  
 O Agamemnon,  
 my father’s kinsman, hear my prayers as well—    
 save your children.  

ORESTES  
 I murdered by mother . . .  
ELECTRA  
 I handed him the sword . . . 

PYLADES  
 I urged him on  
 and overcame his hesitation.  

ORESTES  
 I was defending you, father.  

ELECTRA  
 And I  
 did not betray you.  

PYLADES  
 Surely you’ll listen  
 to these reproaches and save your children.      

ORESTES  
 I’m pouring a libation to you in my tears.  

ELECTRA  
 And I with my laments.  

PYLADES  
 Stop this now.                                     
 Let’s get to work. If it’s true that prayers  
 do pierce the ground, then he is listening.  
 O ancestral Zeus and holy Justice, grant success to him, to her, to me,  
 to three friends facing a single struggle,  
 a single punishment—we all will live,  
 or pay the price and die.  

[Orestes and Pylades enter the house. Electra turns to face the Chorus]  

ELECTRA  
 O you women of Mycenae, my friends,  
 among the first ranks of those who live  
 in the Argives’ Pelasgian home.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 What is it you want to say, my lady? 
 You still retain this title in the city                                                   
 where the sons of Danaus live.                                                
ELECTRA  
 Place yourselves where you can watch the house—  
 some of you there on the chariot roadway,  
 some of you here along the other path.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Why are you calling me to do these tasks?  
 Tell me, dear girl.  

ELECTRA  
 I’m afraid someone  
 may come across the murderous bloodshed  
 in the house and witness new disasters  
 to add to old calamities.  

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS  
 Let’s hurry on our way.  
 Let’s go. I’ll stand guard on this pathway,  
 the one towards the east.  

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS  
 And I’ll guard this road,     
 the one towards the west.  

ELECTRA  
 Keep your eyes moving   
 back and forth, checking on both sides.  

CHORUS  
 Back and forth, then once more back again—  
 I’m following what you said.  

ELECTRA  
 Keep your eyes alert.  
 Let them see everything through that hair of yours.  

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS  
 Who’s that man approaching down the road?  
 What country fellow’s wandering round your home?                      

ELECTRA  
 We’re lost, my friends! He’ll tell our enemies 
 about those predators with swords in there—  
 and do so right away.  

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS  
 Calm your fears, my dear. It’s not what you think—the path is empty.  

ELECTRA  
 What’s going on? Is your side still clear for me?  
 Give me a report if it’s all right, 
 if there’s no one there by the front courtyard.  

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS  
 It’s fine here. Just keep watching on your side.  
 None of Danaus’ sons is moving toward us.  

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS  
 Same thing over here. And there’s no noise.                                   

ELECTRA  
 All right. I’ll try listening at the doorway.  
 It’s so quiet. You there inside the house,  
 why the delay in bloodying your victim? They can’t hear. Alas, this looks bad for me!  
 Has her loveliness made their swords grow blunt?  
 Soon some armed man will be rushing here,  
 coming from the Argives to rescue her                                            
 and attack the house. Keep better guard.  
 This is not a contest in sitting still.  
 You women circle around over there,  
 you others over there.  

CHORUS  
 I shift around—  
 I’m looking everywhere along the road.  

[Helen screams from inside the house]  

HELEN [within]  
 O Pelasgian Argos! I’m being butchered!                                
CHORUS [speaking as separate individuals]  
—Did you hear that? The men have set their hands  
 to killing.  

—That’s Helen screaming. That’s my guess.  

ELECTRA  
 O Zeus, O eternal power of Zeus—  
 just come and help my friends.                                                        

HELEN [within]  
 Menelaus, I’m dying—you’re close by  
 but you won’t help me!  

ELECTRA  
 Slaughter her, finish her off!  
 Destroy her! Let your two swords  
 slash her with their double blades,  
 the one who left her father, left her husband, and butchered  
 so many Greeks, killed by spears  
 beside the river bank, where tears  
 and then more tears were shed,  
 with iron weapons all around  
 the whirling waters of Scamander. [^note-426]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Be quiet! Don’t say a thing! I hear the sound  
 of someone coming along the pathway,  
 near the house.  

ELECTRA  
 You women, dearest friends,  
 Hermione’s coming, while the murder’s still going on. We must stop shouting. She’ll walk  
 headlong into the meshes of our net.  
 Our catch will be a fine one, if she’s caught.  
 Go back to your positions once again.  
 Keep your looks serene. Don’t let your colour  
 reveal what’s happened. I’ll keep my eyes  
 looking sad, as if I had no knowledge                                              
 of what’s been done.  

[Hermione enters, coming towards the house]  

ELECTRA  
 Ah my girl, have you come 
 from placing wreaths on Clytaemnestra’s grave  
 and pouring out libations to the dead?                                   
HERMIONE  
 Once I obtained her favour, I returned.  
 But a certain fear has come over me—  
 when I was still some distance from the house  
 I heard some screaming coming from inside.  

ELECTRA  
 Is that so strange? What’s happening to us  
 deserves such cries of sorrow.  

HERMIONE  
 Don’t say bad things.  
 What news have you to speak of?  

ELECTRA  
 The state  
 decrees Orestes and myself must die.  

HERMIONE  
 No, no! You’re my blood relatives!  

ELECTRA  
 It’s done.                                
 We’re strapped under necessity’s harsh yoke.                        
HERMIONE  
 Was that why someone screamed inside the house?  

ELECTRA  
 A suppliant cried out as he fell down  
 at Helen’s knees.  

HERMIONE  
 Who was it? Tell me—  
 if you don’t, I won’t know any details.  

ELECTRA  
 It was poor Orestes. He was begging  
 not to die—and for me, as well.  

HERMIONE  
 The house  
 has a good reason then to cry aloud.  

ELECTRA  
 What other better reason could there be  
 for someone to scream about? But come now,  
 join your relatives in their entreaties, prostrating yourself before your mother,  
 now she enjoys such great prosperity,  
 so Menelaus will not see us die.  
 You who were nursed in my own mother’s arms,                            
 have pity on us and assist us now  
 in our distress. Enter the struggle here.  
 I’ll lead you in myself, for you alone  
 are our last hope of rescue.  

HERMIONE  
 Watch me—  
 my feet are hurrying towards the house.  
 As far as it lies within my power, may you be safe.  

[Hermione enters the palace]  

ELECTRA  
 You friends inside the house—             
 why not take your swords and seize your prey?  

HERMIONE [from within the house]  
 O no! Who are these men I see?  

ORESTES [from within]  
 Silence!  
 You’ve come to save us, not yourself. 

ELECTRA [at the doorway, looking in]  
 Grab her!  
 Hold her down! Put your sword across her throat—                      
 and keep quiet, so Menelaus will know  
 he’s met some men, not Phrygian cowards,  
 and has been dealt with as bad men deserve.  

[Electra enters the house]  

CHORUS  
 O friends, begin the rhythmic beat,  
 the noise and shouts, before the house, so that this murder, once complete,  
 may not inspire a dreadful fear  
 among the Argives and they run here  
 to help the royal house, not before  
 I see for certain Helen’s dead  
 and lying in blood there in the house  
 or hear the news from her attendant.  
 I know a part of what’s gone on,  
 but there are things I do not know.                                                  
 Justice from the gods has rightly come with retribution now to Helen—  
 because she filled all Greece with tears  
 thanks to that accursed destroyer,  
 Paris from Ida, who led Greeks to Troy.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 The bolts on the palace doors are creaking.  
 Be quiet. One of the Phrygians  
 is coming out. We’ll find out from him  
 how things are going inside.  

[A Phrygian enters, quite terrified. He chants or sings his first speeches] [^note-427]  

PHRYGIAN  
 I’ve fled death from an Argive sword  
 by scrambling in my Asian slippers    
 over bedroom cedar ceiling beams  
 and the Doric carvings on the frieze  
 Ruined! Gone! O earth, earth,  
 in my barbarian flight! Alas for me!  
 You strange ladies, how can I flee—  
 by flying up through the shining sky  
 or out to sea, which bull-headed Ocean,  
 as he rolls in circles round the earth,  
 holds in his arms’ embrace?  

CHORUS LEADER  
 What’s going on,  
 you slave of Helen, creature from Ida?     

PHRYGIAN  
 Ilion, O Ilion! O woe is me  
 city of Phrygia, Ida’ sacred hill  
 with its rich earth, how I lament  
 with my barbarian cries your ruin,  
 funereal melodies and dirges,  
 because the vision of loveliness  
 born from a swan-feathered bird,  
 Leda’s lion cub, that hellish Helen,  
 that evil Helen, avenging fury  
 for Apollo’s polished citadel. Alas! Alas, for these laments,                                                           
 these dirges for Dardania,  
 for the horsemanship of Ganymede  
 Zeus’ sexual partner in his bed. [^note-428]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Tell us what’s happening inside the house,  
 clearly and in detail. Your words so far  
 are difficult for me to understand.  

PHRYGIAN  
 O Linus, Linus—as barbarians say  
 in their Asian tongue, once death begins,  
 whenever royal blood spills on the earth from iron swords of Hades. They came there,                                 
 inside the house—I’m giving you each detail—  
 twin lions of Greece, one who was called  
 the commander’s son, the other one  
 the son of Stophius, with a wicked mind,  
 just like Odysseus, a silent traitor,  
 but faithful to his friends, bold in a fight,  
 clever in war, a deadly serpent. Damn him  
 for his quiet deviousness, the scoundrel!  
 They came in, up to where she was sitting, the woman archer Paris married, faces                                             
 wet with tears, and humbly crouched down there,  
 one on either side, keeping her hemmed in.  
 They threw their suppliant arms around her knees—  
 both laid hands on Helen. Then on the run  
 her Phrygian servants came rushing up,  
 each calling to the others in their fear  
 that it might be a trick. To some of them                                        
 it looked all right, but it seemed to others  
 that the snake who murdered his own mother was entangling the child of Tyndareus  
 in a devious plot to snare her.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Where were you?  
 Had you run off in terror long before that?  

PHRYGIAN  
 It so chanced that I, as a Phrygian,  
 was following Phrygian fashions  
 and with a circular feathered fan  
 was wafting breezes, breezes by the curls  
 of Helen, on Helen’s cheeks—a habit  
 we barbarians have. She was twisting yarn                                      
 wrapping her fingers round the spindle. The thread was falling down onto the floor.  
 With those Phrygian spoils she wished to make  
 some purple clothes, a gift for Clytaemnestra,  
 to adorn her tomb. Orestes then spoke up  
 and called out to the Spartan girl, “Child of Zeus,  
 leave your chair and stand up over here,                                          
 by the ancient hearth of Pelops, our ancestor,  
 so you can hear the words I have to say.”
 He led her, yes led her, and she followed—  
 she had no idea what he was planning. His partner, that evil man from Phocis,  
 moved off, going about some other business.  
      “You Phrygian cowards, leave—go somewhere else!”
 Then he locked them up in different places  
 all through the house—some in the stables,  
 some in the porticoes—some here, some there,                              
 leaving them in various locations  
 some distance from their mistress.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Then what happened?  

PHRYGIAN  
 Mother of Ida! O sacred mother, 
 holy one! O the murderous suffering, the lawless evil I saw there, I witnessed  
 in the royal palace. Their hands pulled swords  
 out from the darkness of their purple robes,  
 rolling their eyes back and forth, here and there,  
 to check that no one else was there. They stood,  
 like mountain boars, facing the woman there,                                 
 and said, “You’ll die. You’ll die. Your evil mate  
 is the one who’s killing you—he betrayed  
 his brother’s family to die in Argos.”
 She screamed, she howled, “Alas for me!” and beat her white forearm against her breast  
 and struck her fist against her wretched head.  
 Then she ran off—on golden-sandaled feet  
 she rushed off, she fled. But then Orestes,  
 jumping ahead in his Mycenaean boots,                                          
 shoved his fingers in her hair, bent her neck  
 on his left shoulder, and was quite prepared  
 to drive his black sword right into her throat.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Where were you Phrygian household servants  
 to defend her?  

PHRYGIAN  
 We yelled—then with crowbars battered the doors and door posts in the rooms  
 where we’d been held and ran from every spot  
 to her assistance. One man carried stones,  
 one had spears, and one held a drawn sword.  
 But Pylades came at us without fear,  
 just like Trojan Hector or like Ajax,                                                 
 with his triple plumes, whom I saw once—  
 I saw him at Priam’s gate. So we met  
 at sword point. And then the Phrygians showed  
 in their full glory how for warlike spirit they were born inferior in fighting strength  
 compared to Greeks. One man ran away,  
 one man was killed, another wounded,  
 another pleaded to protect his life.  
 We ran off, into the shadows, while men  
 were falling dead. Some would soon collapse,  
 and some were killed already. At that point,  
 poor Hermione came in the palace,                                                 
 just as her mother, the unlucky one  
 who’d given birth to her, had fallen down, sprawling on the ground about to die.  
 The two men, like followers of Bacchus  
 chasing a mountain cub without a thyrsus,  
 ran up and grabbed her. [^note-429] Then they turned again  
 to slaughter Zeus’ daughter. But Helen  
 had vanished from the room—right through the house—  
 O Zeus, and earth, and light, and darkness—  
 either by magic spells or wizard’s skill  
 or god’s deceit! What happened after that  
 I’ve no idea. Just like a fugitive, my legs crept from the house. So Menelaus,                                   
 after going through such painful, painful toil,  
 got his wife Helen out of Troy in vain.  

[Orestes enters from the house]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Look how one strange sight succeeds another!  
 I see Orestes, sword in hand, coming here,  
 before the palace—his pace is jumpy.  

ORESTES  
 Where’s that man who ran out of the house,  
 to escape my sword?  

PHRYGIAN [throwing himself on the ground]  
 I bow to you, my lord,  
 making obeisance, as is the habit  
 of we barbarians. 

ORESTES  
 We’re not in Troy. We’re in the land of Argos.  

PHRYGIAN  
 But everywhere  
 life is more welcome to wise men than death.  

ORESTES  
 Those shouts you made—you weren’t calling out                           
 for Menelaus to bring up help, were you?  

PHRYGIAN  
 No, no. I was helping you, the worthier man.  

ORESTES  
 So it was just for Tyndareus’ daughter  
 to be put to death?  

PHRYGIAN  
 It was most just,  
 even if she had three throats to slit.  

ORESTES  
 Your cowardice makes your tongue delightful—  
 that’s not what you think inside.  

PHRYGIAN  
 That’s not true. Was she not the one who wiped out Greece  
 and Phrygians, too?  

ORESTES  
 Swear you’re not just saying this  
 to humour me—or else I’ll kill you.  

PHRYGIAN  
 I swear it on my life—an oath I’ll keep.  

ORESTES [holding up his sword]  
 Were all the Phrygians at Troy afraid  
 of iron, the way you are?  

PHRYGIAN  
 That sword of yours,  
 put it away. When it’s so close to me  
 it has a dreadful glint of murder.  

ORESTES  
 Are you afraid you’ll turn to stone, as if                                           
 you’d seen a Gorgon? [^note-430]  

PHRYGIAN  
 No, not to a stone, but to a corpse. I don’t know anything  
 about the Gorgon’s head.  

ORESTES  
 You’re just a slave.  
 Do you fear Hades, which will release you  
 from your troubles?  

PHRYGIAN  
 Every man, slave or not,  
 is glad to look upon the light of day.  

ORESTES  
 Well said. Your shrewd mind is your salvation.  
 Go inside the house.  

PHRYGIAN  
 You won’t kill me?  

ORESTES  
 You’re free to go.  

PHRYGIAN  
 That’s beautiful, what you just said.  

ORESTES  
 But I’m about to reconsider.  

PHRYGIAN  
 Now your words are not so nice.  

ORESTES  
 You fool! Do you think I could stand to stain your neck,  
 make it bloody? You weren’t born a woman  
 and don’t belong with men. I left the house  
 to stop you making such a noise. Argos                                          
 is quick to move once it hears the call.  
 But still I’m not afraid of matching swords  
 with Menelaus. Let him come—the man  
 who’s so proud of that golden hair of his  
 reaching to his shoulders. If he gathers  
 Argives up and leads them to the palace, seeking to avenge the death of Helen,  
 and will not rescue me and my sister  
 and Pylades, who worked with me in this,  
 he’ll see two dead, his daughter and his wife.  

[Orestes enters the palace. The Phrygian leaves]  

CHORUS [different parts speak different sections]  
 Alas, alas, how things fall out!  
 Another struggle—once more the house  
 is plunged into another fearful round  
 afflicting the family of Atreus!  

 What do we do? Tell the news in town?  
 Or stay quiet? That’s the safer course, my friends.    

 Look there, in front of the palace. 
 Look! That smoke rushing up to heaven  
 is telling its own public story.  

 They’re lighting torches—they’re going to fire  
 the house of Tantalus! They won’t stop killing!  

 God determines how things end for mortal men,  
 whatever end he wishes.  

 Those demons of revenge have mighty power.  
 The house has fallen—fallen through blood,  
 thanks to Myrtilus tumbling from his chariot. [^note-431]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 But look! I see Menelaus coming—  
 he’s near the house and moving quickly.  
 He must have heard what’s happening here.                                   
 You descendants of Atreus in there,  
 hurry now to close and bolt the doors.  
 A man who’s had success is dangerous  
 for those whose situation is not good—  
 that means men like you, Orestes.  

[Menelaus enters with an armed escort]  

MENELAUS  
 I came because I heard of dreadful acts,  
 violent deeds committed by two lions. I don’t call them men. I was told my wife  
 did not die but has gone and disappeared,  
 an idle rumour which some fool deluded  
 by his fear reported to me. It’s a trick  
 made up by that man who killed his mother.                                   
 Ridiculous! Someone open up the house.  
 I’m telling my escort to break in the doors,  
 so I may rescue my own child at least  
 from the hands of those bloodstained murderers,  
 and take back my poor unfortunate wife. Those who killed my consort must die with her—  
 my own hands will kill them.  

[As the escort moves towards the doors of the palace, Orestes appears on the  
roof with Pylades. Orestes is holding Hermione with a sword at her throat, and 
Pylades is holding burning torches]  

ORESTES [from the roof]  
 You down there!  
 Keep your hands off those door bolts. I mean you,  
 Menelaus, you who exalt yourself  
 with impudence. I’ll break this parapet—  
 the wall was made by masons long ago—                                       
 and smash your head in with a coping stone.  
 The bolts are fastened down with metal rods.  
 They’ll check your eagerness to bring help fast  
 and stop you gaining access to the house.                                
MENELAUS  
 Hold on. What’s happening? I see torches blazing,  
 men cornered up there on the palace roof, 
 a sword ready to cut my daughter’s throat.  

ORESTES  
 You want to question me or hear me talk?  

MENELAUS  
 Neither. But it seems I’ll have to hear you out.  

ORESTES  
 I’m going to kill you daughter—if you want to know.  

MENELAUS  
 After killing Helen, you’re going to pile  
 one murder on another?  

ORESTES  
 I wish I’d done it,  
 instead of having the gods trick me.                                                

MENELAUS  
 You deny you killed her just to mock me?                                
ORESTES  
 Yes. It hurts to say I didn’t do it.  
 If only I had . . . 

MENELAUS  
 If only you’d done what?  
 You’re trying to frighten me.  

ORESTES  
                                          . . . thrown the woman  
 who pollutes all Greece down into hell.  

MENELAUS  
 Give me my wife’s corpse, so I can bury her.  

ORESTES  
 Ask the gods for her. But your daughter here  
 I will kill.  

MENELAUS  
 The man who killed his mother  
 compounds that murder with another.  

ORESTES  
 The man who stands up for his father—  
 the man you betrayed and left to die.                                       
MENELAUS  
 Isn’t your mother’s blood now on your hands  
 enough for you?  

ORESTES  
 No. I’d never get tired                                            
 if I had to keep killing evil woman  
 for an eternity.  

MENELAUS  
 And you, Pylades,  
 are you his partner in this murder? 

ORESTES  
 His silence speaks for him. It’s quite enough  
 if I say he is.  

MENELAUS  
 Well, you’ll regret it,  
 unless you sprout wings and fly away.  

ORESTES  
 We’re not going to run. We’ll burn the palace.  

MENELAUS  
 What? You’re intending to destroy this house, your own ancestral home?  

ORESTES  
 So you won’t have it.  
 And in the flames I’ll sacrifice this girl.               

MENELAUS  
 Kill her, then. After the slaughter, you’ll pay.  
 I’ll punish you.  

ORESTES  
 All right, I will.  

[Orestes moves as if he is going to kill Hermione]  

MENELAUS  
 No, no!  
 Don’t do it!  

ORESTES  
 Silence! You must endure this,  
 justice for the evils you have done.           

MENELAUS  
 It is just that you should live?  

ORESTES  
 Yes, it is—                                           
 and rule a country.  

MENELAUS  
 A country? Where?  

ORESTES  
 Right here. In Pelasgian Argos.  

MENELAUS  
 O yes,  
 you’d be so good at handling those vessels we use for ritual washing. [^note-432]  

ORESTES  
 Why not?  

MENELAUS  
 And killing animals for sacrifice  
 before a battle.  

ORESTES  
 Would you be suitable?  

MENELAUS  
 Yes, my hands are pure.  

ORESTES  
 But your heart is not.  

MENELAUS  
 What man would speak to you?  

ORESTES  
 Any man  
 who loved his father.  

MENELAUS  
 What about the one  
 who respects his mother?  

ORESTES  
 A man like that  
 is born lucky.  

MENELAUS  
 You’re not like that.  

ORESTES  
 No, I’m not.  
 Bad women are not something I enjoy.  

MENELAUS  
 Take your sword away from my daughter.                               
ORESTES  
 You’re a born liar.  

MENELAUS  
 You’ll kill my daughter?  

ORESTES  
 Yes. Now you’re not spreading lies     

MENELAUS  
 That’s dreadful.  
 What should I do?  

ORESTES  
 You should go to the Argives                             
 and win them over . . .  

MENELAUS  
 What should I tell them?  

ORESTES 
 Tell them not to kill us. Beg the city.  

MENELAUS  
 Or else you’ll kill my child?  

ORESTES  
 That how it stands.  

MENELAUS  
 O poor Helen . . .  

ORESTES [interrupting]  
 What about my troubles?  

MENELAUS  
. . . I brought you back from Phrygia to be killed.  

ORESTES  
 If only she had been!  

MENELAUS  
 After I went through  
 all that effort.  

ORESTES  
 Except on my behalf.                                       
MENELAUS  
 I’ve had to endure such awful suffering!  

ORESTES  
 Because you were no help at all back then.  

MENELAUS  
 You’ve caught me out.  

ORESTES  
 No. You caught yourself  
 by being such a coward.  

[Orestes calls down to Electra who comes out in front of the palace doors 
in response to his call]  

ORESTES  
 Electra, 
 set fire to the house from underneath.  
 And you, Pylades, my most trusty friend,  
 burn down the parapets of these walls here.                                    

MENELAUS  
 O land of the Danaans and you who live  
 in horse-rich Argos, take up your weapons  
 and bring help on the run. To save his life this man here is using force against you,  
 against the entire city, though he carries  
 the pollution of his mother’s murdered blood.  

[Menelaus’ escort starts moving en masse toward the palace doors. Meanwhile 
fire breaks out on the roof and inside the palace. Then Apollo and Helen suddenly 
appear descending from on high]  

APOLLO  
 Menelaus, you must blunt the sharp edge  
 of your temper. I am Phoebus, Leto’s son,  
 calling you from close at hand—and that man  
 holding a sword and standing by that girl,  
 Orestes, so you know the news I bring.  
 As for Helen whom you were so eager                                              
 to destroy in your rage at Menelaus, you failed to kill her, and she’s here with me  
 in the surrounding air. I rescued her  
 and she wasn’t murdered. Yes, I saved her.  
 I snatched her away from that sword of yours,  
 at my father Zeus’ bidding, for Helen,  
 a child of Zeus, is to live forever.  
 She’ll sit with Castor and Polydeuces,  
 held up in the upper air, a saviour  
 for sailing men. So choose another wife,  
 Menelaus, and take her home. The gods used this one’s outstanding loveliness  
 to bring Greeks and Phrygians together                                           
 and cause a slaughter, so they might stop  
 the overwhelming crowds of mortal men  
 destroying the earth. So much for Helen.  
 And as for you, Orestes, you must cross  
 the borders of this country and then live  
 on Parrhasian soil for one entire year. [^note-433]  
 Because you’ll be an exile there, that land  
 will be called the country of Orestes by people in Azania and Arcadia.  
 From there you’ll go to the Athenians’ city  
 and must stand trial for murdering your mother                              
 against the three Eumenides. The gods  
 who on the Hill of Ares judge your case  
 will act righteously—they’ll divide their votes,  
 and from that it’s certain you will triumph.  
 And then, Orestes, it is foreordained  
 that you will wed Hermione, the girl  
 whose throat you’re threatening with that sword. The man who thinks he’s going to marry her,  
 Neoptolemus, will never wed her.  
 He’s fated to die by a sword in Delphi,  
 when he demands satisfaction from me  
 for the killing of his father, Achilles. [^note-434]  
 Give your sister in marriage to Pylades,  
 as you once promised. His future life  
 will be a happy one. As for Argos,                                                     
 Menelaus, you must leave Orestes  
 to rule the state. Go and govern Sparta. Keep that as a dowry from your wife.  
 The countless troubles she has always brought  
 up to this point will end. I’ll set things right  
 between Orestes and the city, for I  
 was the one who made him kill his mother.  

ORESTES  
 O prophetic Loxias—in your oracles  
 you prophesy the truth, there’s nothing false.  
 And yet fear gripped me that I might have heard  
 some demon when I listened to your voice.  
 But all has ended well. I will obey    
 what you have said. See here—I now release  
 Hermione from death, and I agree  
 to take her as my wife, just as soon as  
 her father gives her to me.  

MENELAUS  
 All hail, Helen,  
 daughter of Zeus. I wish you happiness  
 in the gods’ sacred home. Orestes,  
 following what Phoebus said, I here pledge  
 my daughter to you. You’re a noble man. 
 May you prosper in a noble marriage,  
 and may I as well, who give her to you.                                   
APOLLO  
 Then each of you set out to the place  
 I have arranged, and end your quarreling. 

MENELAUS  
 I must obey.  

ORESTES  
 So must I. I’ll make peace                                           
 with you, Menelaus, in this matter, 
 and, Loxias, with what your oracle has said.  

APOLLO  
 Go on your way now, and honour Peace,  
 the fairest of the gods. I’ll bring Helen  
 to the halls of Zeus, once I’ve moved across  
 the star-bright sky. There she will be seated  
 by Hera and Hebe, wife of Hercules, and men will forever pay her honour  
 as a goddess, making their libations.  
 With those two Zeus-born sons of Tyndareus,  
 she’ll be a guardian for sailors out at sea.                                         

[Apollo and Helen leave. Orestes, Hermione and Pylades move  
down into the house. Menelaus and his escort depart]  

CHORUS  
 O great and holy Victory, 
 may you take possession of my life,  
 and never cease to crown me with your garlands.  
  
  

[^note-401]: *. . . his tongue*: Tantalus, a son of Zeus, offended the gods, who punished him by placing him in Hades where he is constantly tempted by food and drink which he cannot reach (Odysseus tells us of seeing the shade of Tantalus in Book 11 of the Odyssey). His offense varies, depending on the story. In some accounts, he stole food from the gods and revealed their secrets to human beings. In others, he cut up his son Pelops and served him up as food for the gods. 

[^note-402]: *. . . his brother, Thyestes*: The Fates set a man’s destiny at birth by spinning yarn, measuring and cutting it. Traditionally there were three female fates. 

[^note-403]: *. . . all men’s eyes*: Phoebus is the name of the god Apollo, whose oracle Orestes consulted before returning to murder his mother and Aegisthus in revenge for his father’s death. 

[^note-404]: *. . . terrible ordeals*: The Eumenides (literally the “Kindly Ones”) are the Furies, goddesses of blood revenge within the family, who are tormenting Orestes because he killed his mother. Electra does not call them by their official name but uses a common euphemism, presumably because she does not want to risk offending them. 

[^note-405]: *. . . hair and libations*: Placing a lock of one’s hair on a burial mound and pouring libations beside it are traditional marks of respect for the dead. 

[^note-406]: *. . . in Mycenae*: The names Argos and Mycenae are often used interchangeably for the same city, although in some accounts they are two different communities. 

[^note-407]: *. . . of my mother*: Loxias is a common name for Apollo, whose shrine Orestes consulted before killing Clytaemnestra. Themis, the goddess of righteousness, was the original god of the oracle. 

[^note-408]: *. . . from Erebus*: Erebus is the deepest and darkest region of Hades, the underworld. 

[^note-409]: *. . . navel of the earth*: The navel, or central point, of the earth was, according to tradition, located in Apollo’s shrine in Delphi. 

[^note-410]: *. . . from Tantalus*: Tantalus is the founder of the royal family of Agamemnon, Menelaus, Orestes, and Electra. He was a son of Zeus and a divine nymph. 

[^note-411]: *. . . Malea*: Menelaus’ return from Troy (as he tells us in the Odyssey) was long delayed. He was blown off course to Egypt, where he stayed for a while. Malea is the southernmost tip of the Peloponnese. 

[^note-412]: *. . . suppliant branch*: In a formal supplication the petitioner carries an olive branch. Orestes doesn’t have one available. 

[^note-413]: *. . . something horrific*: West makes the useful observation (p. 210) that the Greeks did not yet have a clear sense of a good or bad conscience. This line suggests something like a sense of guilt arising out of one’s awareness of the moral qualities of an act. As West observes, Menelaus in his response seems confused by the idea. 

[^note-414]: *. . . are his friends*: I have adopted West’s suggestion that this line refers to the god (Apollo) rather than to Orestes himself: “I am not wise, but by nature I am true to my friends (see West 212). 

[^note-415]: *. . . for Palamedes*: Oeax is the brother of Palamedes, an Achaean warrior at Troy. When Odysseus pretended to be mad so that he would not have to go on the expedition to Troy, Palamedes tricked him into revealing his sanity. Later, in Troy, Odysseus forced a Phrygian (Trojan) prisoner to write a treasonous letter apparently from Palamedes. Agamemnon found the letter and put Palamedes to death. 

[^note-416]: *. . . twins from Zeus*: Tyndareus and Leda had four children at the same time: Helen, Clytaemnestra, Castor, and Pollux (also called Polydeuces). However, Tyndareus was the biological father of only two of them, Castor and Clytaemnestra. Helen and Pollux were conceived by Zeus (in the form of a swan) and Leda. In some accounts (as here) both Castor and Pollux are children of Zeus. 

[^note-417]: *. . . of your wife*: The immediate cause of the Trojan War was Paris’ abduction of Helen, Menelaus’ wife, from Sparta (Helen went willingly enough). Agamemnon, the senior of the two brothers, took command of the Greek army which assembled at Aulis in response to a promise all the kings had made to Tyndareus, that they would help Helen’s husband, should he ever require their assistance. The goddess Artemis prevented the Greek fleet from sailing until Agamemnon sacrificed his daughter Iphigeneia, an action which Agamemnon carried out. 

[^note-418]: *. . . double line of Atreus*: The “double line” is the families of Agamemnon and Menelaus, sons of Atreus. The “golden ram” mentioned refers to an animal in Atreus’ flocks, on the basis of which he claimed the throne over the objections of his brother Thyestes. The slaughter at the banquet is another reference to the dinner in which Atreus served up to his brother Thyestes the latter’s sons as the main course. 

[^note-419]: *. . . on this very day*: The word Pelasgian is frequently used to describe the Argives. The word hearkens back to the original inhabitants of the area. 

[^note-420]: *. . . by Aegyptus*: The fifty daughters of Danaus married the fifty sons of Aegyptus and killed their husbands (all but one) on the wedding night. In some accounts Aegyptus prosecuted Danaus for the mass murder. 

[^note-421]: *. . . those Phrygians*: Talthybius is a character in the Iliad, a herald in the Achaean army who serves Agamemnon. Phrygians is a term commonly used to designate the Trojans or barbarian Asiatics. 

[^note-422]: *. . . shave it close*: The Cyclopian land is a reference to the city of Mycenae whose walls were so big that legend had it they had been built by the Cyclopes. Shaving the head is often an important element in a mourning ritual. 

[^note-423]: *. . . along the shore*: These lines refer to the origin of the troubles in the House of Atreus. Pelops wanted Hippodamnia as his bride. Her father, Oenomaus, demanded a chariot race to determine the outcome: if Pelops won he could wed the daughter, and if Pelops was not successful he would die. Pelops bribed Myrtilus to sabotage the king’s chariot and, as a result, won the race. Then he killed his co-conspirator, Myrtilus, by throwing him into the sea. Myrtilus cursed Pelops’ family as he was drowning. Myrtilus was a son of the god Hermes, son of Zeus and the nymph Maia (as is mentioned a couple of lines further on), and the god made sure the curse took effect by introducing a golden lamb into the flocks belonging to the sons of Pelops, thus inciting the brothers Atreus and Thyestes to quarrel. 

[^note-424]: *. . . the Pleiades*: The suggestion here seems to be that before this change, the sun did not move from east to west. I have adopted West’s useful emendation of the text to read “white horses” rather than “single horse.” The Pleiades is a constellation consisting of seven stars. 

[^note-425]: *. . . deceitful marriage*: Aerope was the wife of Atreus and the mother of Agamemnon and Menelaus. In some versions of the story, she had an adulterous affair with Thyestes and was executed. 

[^note-426]: *. . . Scamander*: The Scamander is a river near Troy, right in the middle of the areas where the battles between Greeks and Trojans took place. 

[^note-427]: There is some dispute about how the Phrygian enters—does he come through the doors (as the Chorus Leader’s line about the bolts suggests) or does he come down from the roof (as his opening lines suggest). West, who opts for an entry down from the roof, has a useful note on the point (p. 275-6). 

[^note-428]: *. . . in his bed*: These lines are such a strained evocation of different myths that it’s hard not to see them as either satirical or intentionally comical. The reference to the swan is a reminder of Helen’s conception, when Zeus in the form of a swan had sex with Leda, wife of Tyndareus. Apollo’s polished citadel is a reference to the high tower of Troy. And Ganymede, a prince of Troy, was so beautiful that he was taken up to Olympus as a young boy to be Zeus’ cup bearer and sexual playmate. It’s not clear what the mention of his “horsemanship” indicates, unless it’s a sexual pun. Dardania is a reference to Troy, the land of Dardanus (the founder of the city). 

[^note-429]: *. . . grabbed her*: The followers of Bacchus are the ecstatic worshippers who roam the mountains, often capturing wild animals and tearing them apart. The thyrsus is a plant stem, often with magical properties, which they carry as part of the ritual frenzy. 

[^note-430]: *. . . seen a Gorgon*: The Gorgons were three sisters whose looks could turn people into stone. One of them who was mortal (Medusa) was killed by Perseus. 

[^note-431]: *. . . from his chariot*: As noted before, Myrtilus conspired withPelops to trick king Oenomaus in a chariot race, so that Pelops could win Hippodameia, the king’s daughter. Myrtilus, the king’s charioteer, sabotaged the royal chariot. Pelops then killed Myrtilus by throwing him out of his chariot into the sea. This event launches the disasters which befall the House of Atreus (Atreus is one ofPelops’ sons). 

[^note-432]: *. . . ritual washing*: One of the duties of a king was to lead important religious ceremonies. These could only be conducted by someone free of the pollution from any crime he had committed. 

[^note-433]: *. . . one entire year: Parrhasia is a region in Arcadia, an area in the central Peloponnese. 

[^note-434]: *. . . his father, Achilles*: Achilles was killed at Troy. His son Neoptolemus came to Troy, joined the fighting, and killed Priam, king of Troy. He was later killed by a priest at Delphi, Apollo’s shrine. There are other stories, however, which have Neoptolemus marrying Hermione. 
  
  

