# (EURIPIDES) Medea {#euripides_book-medea}  
  
C> *This edition is based on the [publicly available](http://records.viu.ca/~Johnstoi/euripides/medea.htm) translation by Ian Johnston*  
  

*For a brief introductory note to the mythological background of the story of Medea and Jason, see [this section](#intro-medea)*  
  
...  

  
**DRAMATIS PERSONAE**  
  
**Nurse**: a servant of Medea.  
**Tutor**: a servant assigned to Jason's children.  
**Medea**: wife of Jason.  
**Chorus**: a group of Corinthian women.  
**Creon**: king of Corinth.  
**Jason**: husband of Medea.  
**Aegeus**: king of Athens.  
**Messenger**: a servant of Jason's.  
**Children**: Medea's and Jason's two young sons.  
**Attendants on Creon and Jason**.  
 
  

[Outside the home of Jason and Medea in Corinth. The Nurse, a slave who serves Medea, is standing by herself]  
  
NURSE  
 Oh how I wish that ship the Argo  
 had never sailed off to the land of Colchis,  
 past the Symplegades, those dark dancing rocks  
 which smash boats sailing through the Hellespont.  
 I wish they'd never chopped the pine trees down  
 in those mountain forests up on Pelion,  
 to make oars for the hands of those great men  
 who set off, on Pelias' orders,  
 to fetch the golden fleece. Then my mistress,  
 Medea, never would've sailed away to the towers in the land of Iolcus,  
 her heart passionately in love with Jason.  
 She'd never have convinced those women,  
 Pelias' daughters, to kill their father.  
 She'd not have come to live in Corinth here,                                       
 with her husband and her children—well loved  
 in exile by those whose land she'd moved to.  
 She gave all sorts of help to Jason.  
 That's when life is most secure and safe,  
 when woman and her husband stand as one. But that marriage changed. Now they're enemies.  
 Their fine love's grown sick, diseased, for Jason,  
 leaving his own children and my mistress,  
 is lying on a royal wedding bed.  
 He's married the daughter of king Creon,  
 who rules this country. As for Medea,  
 that poor lady, in her disgrace, cries out,                                              
 repeating his oaths, recalling the great trust  
 in that right hand with which he pledged his love.  
 She calls out to the gods to witness how Jason is repaying her favours.  
 She just lies there. She won't eat—her body  
 she surrenders to the pain, wasting away,  
 always in tears, ever since she found out  
 how her husband has dishonoured her.  
 She's not lifted her eyes up from the ground,  
 or raised her head. She listens to advice,  
 even from friends, as if she were a stone,  
 or the ocean swell, except now and then  
 she twists that white neck of hers and weeps,     
 crying to herself for her dear father, her home,  
 her own land, all those things she left behind,  
 to come here with the man who now discards her.  
 Her suffering has taught her the advantages  
 of not being cut off from one's own homeland.  
 Now she hates her children. When she sees them,  
 there is no joy in her. And I'm afraid  
 she may be up to some new mischief.  
 Her mind thinks in extremes. I know her well.  
 She'll not put up with being treated badly. I worry she may pick up a sharp sword  
 and stab her stomach, or else she'll go                                                 
 into the house, in silence, to that bed,  
 and kill the king and bridegroom Jason.  
 Then she'll face an even worse disaster.  
 She's a dangerous woman. It won't be easy  
 for any man who picks a fight with her  
 to think she's beaten and he's triumphed.  
[Enter Medea's and Jason's children with their Tutor]  
 Here come her children. They've finished playing.  
 They've no notion of their mother's troubles. Young minds don't like to dwell on pain.  
TUTOR  
 Old slave from my mistress' household,  
 why are you here, standing by the gate,                                               
 all alone, complaining to yourself  
 about what's wrong? How come Medea  
 is willing to stay inside without you?  
NURSE  
 Old servant of Jason's children,  
 when a master's lot falls out badly,  
 that's bad for faithful servants, too—  
 it touches their hearts also. My sorrow was so great, I wanted to come here,  
 to speak to earth and heaven, to tell them  
 about the wrongs inflicted on my mistress.  
TUTOR  
 Unhappy lady! Has she stopped weeping yet?  
NURSE  
 Stopped crying? I envy your ignorance.                                                
 Her suffering has only just begun—  
 she's not even half way through it.  
TUTOR  
 Poor fool—  
 if I can speak that way about my masters—  
 she knows nothing of her latest troubles.  
NURSE  
 What's that, old man? Don't spare me the news.  
TUTOR  
 Nothing. I'm sorry I said anything.  
NURSE  
 Come on, don't hide it from a fellow slave.  
 I can keep quiet if I have to.  
TUTOR  
 Well, I was passing by those benches  
 where the old men gamble by Peirene,  
 at the holy spring, and I heard someone say  
(I was pretending I wasn't listening)  
 that Creon, king of this country, intends  
 to ship the children away from Corinth,                                               
 with their mother, too. I've no idea if the story's true or not. I hope it's not.  
NURSE  
 But surely Jason wouldn't let his children  
 go into exile, even if he's squabbling  
 with their mother?  
TUTOR  
 Old devotions fade,  
 pushed aside by new relationships.  
 Jason is no friend of people in this house.  
NURSE  
 If we must add these brand-new troubles  
 to our old ones, before we've dealt with them,  
 then we're finished.  
TUTOR  
 But listen—the time's not right     
 to let your mistress know about these things.  
 So keep quiet. Don't mention anything.  
NURSE  
 Children, do you hear what sort of man  
 your father is to you? My curse on him!  
 No. He is my master—but a bad man  
 to his own family. Of that he's guilty.  
TUTOR  
 What mortal man is not? Don't you know yet  
 all men love themselves more than their neighbours.  
 And some are right to do that—while others  
 just want some benefit. But this father, with his new wife, has no love for his children.  
NURSE  
 Come on, children, get inside the house.  
 Things will be fine. [To the Tutor] You must keep them away—          
 as far as possible—and don't bring them  
 near their mother when she's in this state.  
 I've seen her look at them with savage eyes,  
 as if she means to injure them somehow. 
 I know this anger of hers will not end,  
 not before she turns it loose on someone. 
 I hope it falls on enemies, not on friends!  
MEDEA [crying from inside the house]  
 I can't stand this pain, this misery.  
 What do I do? I wish I could die!  
NURSE  
 My dear children, you hear your mother's cry.  
 Her heart's upset. Her anger's growing, too.  
 So quickly now, run off inside the house.                                            
 Stay out of sight. Don't try to go and see her.  
 She's fierce, headstrong by nature. Take care.  
 So go now—inside as quickly as you can.  
[The Tutor and children enter the house]  
 It's obvious the cloud of bitter grief  
 rising inside her is only just the start. As her temper grows even more intense,  
 it will soon catch fire. She's a passionate soul,  
 hard to restrain. What will she do next,  
 now her heart's been bitten by these injuries?                                      
MEDEA [from inside the house]  
 The pain of this suffering—this intense pain.  
 Am I not right to weep? Oh my children,  
 cursed children of a hateful mother—  
 may you die with your father, all his house,  
 may it all perish, crash down in ruins.  
NURSE  
 Oh the sorrow of it all. Poor woman! Why link your children with the nasty things  
 their father's done? Why do you hate them so?  
 I'm terrified the children will be hurt.  
 The pride of rulers is something to fear—  
 they often order men, but seldom listen.                                             
 And when their tempers change it's hard to bear.  
 It's better to get used to living life  
 as an equal common person. Anyway,  
 I don't want a grand life for myself—  
 just to grow old with some security. They say a moderate life's the best of all,  
 a far better choice for mortal men.  
 Going for too much brings no benefits.  
 And when gods get angry with some home,  
 the more wealth it has, the more it is destroyed.                                  
[Enter the Chorus of Corinthian women]  
CHORUS LEADER  
 I heard her voice, I heard the cries  
 of that sad lady here from Colchis.  
 Has she not calmed down yet? Old nurse, tell me.  
 I heard from some household servant in there  
 that she's been screaming. I find no pleasure in this house's suffering. We've been friends.  
NURSE  
 This house is finished—already done for.  
 For Jason's bound by his new marriage tie                                           
 to the king's daughter. As for my mistress,  
 her tears are washing away her life in there,  
 inside the house. She finds no consolation  
 in the words of any of her friends.  
MEDEA [still from inside the house]  
 Oh why can't a bolt of lightning strike me?  
 What point is there in living any more?  
 I want death to come and sweep me off— let me escape this life of suffering!  
CHORUS  
 Oh Zeus and Earth and Sun—  
 do you hear how this young wife  
 sings out her misery?                                                                            
 Thoughtless lady,  
 why long for death's marriage bed  
 which human beings all shun?  
 Death comes soon enough  
 and brings and end to everything.  
 You should not pray for it. And if your husband  
 devotes himself to some new bed,  
 why get angry over that?  
 Zeus will plead for you in this.  
 Don't waste your life away,  
 with too much wailing for your husband.  
MEDEA [within] 
 O great Themis and noble Artemis,                                                    
 do you see what I am having to endure,  
 when I'm the one who bound that cursed man,  
 my husband, with strong promises to me? Oh, how I want to see him and his bride  
 beaten down, destroyed—their whole house as well—  
 for these wrongs they dare inflict on me,  
 when I've done nothing to provoke them!  
 O father and city, I left you behind  
 in my disgrace when I killed my brother.  
NURSE  
 Do you hear what's she's saying, how she calls  
 to Themis, who hears our prayers, and Zeus,  
 who guards, they say, the promises men swear.                                   
 She's bound to do something quite serious before this rage of hers comes to an end.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 I wish she'd let us see her face to face  
 and listen to what we have to tell her.  
 That might calm down her savage temper,  
 the fury in her heart. I'd like the chance  
 to show good will to a lady whom I like.  
 Go now—bring her here outside the house.                                         
 Tell her she'll be among some friends of hers.  
 And hurry, before she harms someone in there—  
 that power in her grief will make her act. NURSE  
 All right, though I'm afraid I won't persuade  
 my mistress. Still, as a favour to you,  
 I'll see what I can do. Right now she glares  
 at servants when they come close to her  
 to tell her something. She's like a bull,  
 or lioness with cubs—that's how she looks.  
 Those men from long ago—you'd not be wrong                                  
 to call them fools without much wisdom.  
 They thought up songs for celebrations,  
 feasts and banquets, bringing to human life delightful music. But they found nothing  
 in music or the lyre's many strings  
 to end the bitterness of human life,  
 the pain in living, sorrows bringing on  
 the deaths and horrifying disasters  
 which destroy whole families. What a blessing  
 it would be for human beings if music  
 could cure these sorrows. When people feast,                                     
 why should people sing? It's a waste of time.  
 People who eat well are happy anyway— they've enjoyed the pleasure of the meal.  
[Nurse exits into the house]  
CHORUS  
 I have heard Medea's crying,  
 full of sorrow, full of tears,  
 her shrill accusations against Jason,  
 the husband who's betrayed her.  
 Suffering such injustice, she cries out,  
 calling the gods—calling Themis,  
 Zeus' daughter, goddess of those promises  
 which carried her across the ocean  
 to Hellas, through the black salt seas,    
 through the place which few men penetrate,  
 the strait which guards the Pontic Sea.  
[Enter Medea with the Nurse]  
MEDEA  
 Women of Corinth, I'm coming here,  
 outside the house, so you won't think ill of me.  
 Many men, I know, become too arrogant,  
 both in the public eye and in their homes.  
 Others get a reputation for indifference,  
 because they stay at ease within the house.  
 There's no justice in the eyes of mortal men.  
 Before they know someone's deep character,     
 they hate her on sight, though she's not hurt them.  
 A guest of the city must comply, of course,  
 act as the city wants. I don't commend  
 a stubborn man, not even a citizen,  
 who thanks to his stupidity annoys  
 his fellow townsmen. But in my case,  
 this unexpected blow that's hit me,  
 well, it's destroyed my heart. My life is gone,  
 dear friends. I've lost all joy. I want to die.  
 The man who was everything to me, my own husband, has turned out to be  
 the worst of men. This I know is true.  
 Of all things with life and understanding,                                            
 we women are the most unfortunate.  
 First, we need a husband, someone we get  
 for an excessive price. He then becomes  
 the ruler of our bodies. And this misfortune  
 adds still more troubles to the grief we have.  
 Then comes the crucial struggle: this husband  
 we've selected, is he good or bad? For a divorce loses women all respect,  
 yet we can't refuse to take a husband.  
 Then, when she goes into her husband's home,  
 with its new rules and different customs,  
 she needs a prophet's skill to sort out the man  
 whose bed she shares. She can't learn that at home.                            
 Once we've worked hard at this, and with success,  
 our husband accepts the marriage yoke  
 and lives in peace—an enviable life.  
 But if the marriage doesn't work, then death is much to be preferred. When the man tires  
 of the company he keeps at home, he leaves,  
 seeking relief for his distress elsewhere,  
 outside the home. He gets his satisfaction  
 with some male friend or someone his own age.  
 We women have to look at just one man.  
 Men tell us we live safe and secure at home,  
 while they must go to battle with their spears.  
 How stupid they are! I'd rather stand there  
 three times in battle holding up my shield     
 than give birth once. But your story and mine  
 are not the same. For you have a city,  
 you have your father's house, enjoy your life  
 with friends for company. But I'm alone.  
 I have no city, and I'm being abused  
 by my own husband. I was carried off,  
 a trophy from a barbarian country.  
 I have no mother, brother, or relation,  
 to shelter with in this extremity.  
 And so I want to ask something from you. If I find some way to punish Jason                                                      
 for these injustices, and his bride, as well,  
 and father, too, say nothing. In other things  
 a woman may be timid—in watching battles  
 or seeing steel, but when she's hurt in love,  
 her marriage violated, there's no heart  
 more desperate for blood than hers.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 I'll do what you request. For you are right  
 to pay back your husband. And, Medea,  
 I'm not surprised you grieve at these events.  
[Enter Creon, with armed attendants]  
 I see Creon, king of Corinth, coming.  
 He'll be bringing news, announcing  
 some new decision that's been made.                                                  
CREON  
 You there, Medea, scowling in anger  
 against your husband. I'm ordering you  
 out of Corinth. You must go into exile,  
 and take those two children of yours with you.  
 Go quickly. I'm here to make quite sure  
 that this decree is put into effect.  
 I'll not go back to my own palace until I've cast you out, beyond our borders.  
MEDEA  
 Oh, now my sufferings will kill me. It's over.  
 My enemies have set full sail against me,  
 and there's no way I can avert disaster.  
 But, Creon, let me ask you something—                                             
 I'm the one abused, so why banish me?  
 What have I done?  
CREON  
 I'm afraid of you.  
 I won't conceal the truth. There's a good chance  
 you might well instigate some fatal harm  
 against my daughter. Many things lead me to this conclusion: you're a clever woman,  
 very experienced in evil ways;
 you're grieving the loss of your husband's bed;
 and from reports I hear you're making threats  
 to take revenge on Jason, on his bride,  
 and on her father. Before that happens,  
 I'm taking some precautions. Woman,                                                 
 it's better that you hate me, than for me  
 to grow soft now and then regret it later.  
MEDEA  
 Alas, this is not the first time, Creon, my reputation has badly damaged me.  
 It's happened often. No man with any sense  
 should ever educate his children  
 to know anything beyond what's normal.  
 Quite apart from charges of idleness  
 which other people bring against them,  
 they stir up in their fellow citizens  
 a hostile envy. If you offer fools  
 some brand new wisdom, they'll consider you  
 quite useless, not someone wise. And if,      
 within the city, people think of you  
 as greater than those men who seem quite wise,  
 you'll appear a nuisance. So it is with me.  
 For I'm a knowledgeable woman. I make  
 some people envious. Others say I'm shy.  
 Some the opposite. Some say I'm hostile.  
 I'm not that clever, but still you fear me.  
 Have I hurt you at all, made you suffer?  
 Don't fear me, Creon. It's not in me  
 to commit crimes against the men in charge. Besides, in what way have you injured me?  
 You've married your daughter to a man,  
 one your heart selected. My husband's                                                
 the one I hate. In my view, you've acted  
 with good sense in this business. So now,  
 I'll not begrudge you your prosperity.  
 Have your marriage, and good luck to you.  
 But let me remain here, in this country.  
 Although I've suffered an injustice,  
 I'll obey the rulers and stay silent. CREON  
 What you say sounds comforting enough,  
 but I'm still afraid that heart of yours  
 is planning something evil. At this point,  
 I trust you even less than previously.  
 Passionate people, women as well as men,  
 are easier to protect oneself against,                                                    
 than someone clever who keeps silent.  
 No. You must leave—and right away.  
 No more speeches. I've made up my mind.  
 It's not possible for you to stay here, not with us, given your hostility to me.  
MEDEA [kneeling in front of Creon]  
 No, don't send me away. I'm begging you,  
 at your knee, in your daughter's name.  
CREON  
 Your words are useless. You won't persuade me.  
MEDEA  
 You'll send me into exile without hearing  
 my supplication?  
CREON  
 Indeed I will.  
 I don't love you more than my own family.  
MEDEA  
 O my homeland! How I'm thinking of you now.  
CREON  
 Except for my own children, my country  
 is what I cherish most by far.  
MEDEA  
 Alas, love's a miserable thing for mortal men.                                               
CREON  
 I think events determine if that's true.  
MEDEA  
 O Zeus, don't overlook who bears the blame  
 for all this evil.  
CREON  
 It's time to leave,  
 you foolish woman. Time to rid myself  
 of all this trouble.  
MEDEA  
 We have trouble enough—  
 There's no need for any more.  
CREON  
 Come on—  
 or my servants will throw you into exile.  
MEDEA  
 No, don't do that. I beg you, Creon . . .  
[Medea seizes Creon's hand]  
CREON  
 Woman, it seems you're trying to provoke me.  
MEDEA  
 All right then. I will go into exile.  
 I wasn't begging to escape from that.  
CREON  
 Then why squeeze my hand so hard and not let go?  
MEDEA  
 Let me remain here one day to prepare,                                               
 to get ready for my exile, to provide  
 something for my children, since their father,  
 as one more insult, does nothing for them.  
 Have pity on them. You're a parent, too.  
 You should treat them kindly—that's what's right.  
 If I go into exile, I don't care, but I weep for them in their misfortune.  
CREON  
 For a tyrant my will is by nature tender,  
 and by feeling pity I've been hurt before,  
 more than once. And now, woman, I see  
 I'm making a mistake, for you can have                                               
 your extra day. But let me warn you—  
 if the sun catches you tomorrow  
 within the borders of this country,  
 you or your children, you'll be put to death.  
 Don't think I'm not telling you the truth. So, if you must remain, stay one more day.  
 In that time you can't do the harm I fear.  
[Exit Creon with his attendants]  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Alas for you, unfortunate woman—  
 how wretched your distress. Where will you turn? 
 Where will you find someone to take you in? 
 What country, what home will you find yourself  
 to save you from misfortunes?                                                             
MEDEA  
 Things have worked out badly in every way.  
 Who can deny the fact? But nonetheless,  
 you should not assume that's how things will stay. The newly wedded pair still face some struggles,  
 and the man who made this marriage happen  
 might have serious problems yet. Do you think  
 I'd prostrate myself before a man like that,  
 if there was no advantage to be gained?  
 If I didn't have some plan in mind,  
 I'd not have talked to him or grabbed his hand.                                   
 But the man's become completely foolish—  
 when he had the power to prevent me  
 from planning anything, by sending me out of his land, he let me stay one day,  
 a day when I'll turn three of my enemies  
 to corpses—father, daughter, and my husband.  
 Now, I can slaughter them in many ways.  
 I'm not sure which one to try out first.  
 Perhaps I should set the bridal suite on fire,  
 or sneak into the house in silence,  
 right up to their marriage bed, and plunge                                           
 some sharpened steel right through their guts.  
 There's just one problem. If I get caught going in their house, meaning to destroy it,  
 I'll be killed, and my enemies will laugh.  
 No. The best method is the most direct,  
 the one at which I have a special skill—  
 I'll murder them with poison. Yes, that's it.  
 But once they're dead, what city will receive me?  
 Who'll give me safe shelter as a guest,  
 and offer me physical protection?  
 There's no one. Still, I'll wait a little while.  
 If someone shows up who can shield me,    
 I'll set my scheme in motion and kill them  
 without saying a word. But if events  
 force me to act openly, I'll use a sword.  
 Even though it will bring about my death,  
 I'll push my daring to the very limit  
 and slaughter them. By Hecate, the goddess  
 I worship more than all the others,  
 the one I choose to help me in this work,  
 who lives with me deep inside my home,  
 these people won't bring pain into my heart and laugh about it. This wedding of theirs,  
 I'll make it hateful for them, a disaster—  
 Creon's marriage ties, my exile from here,                                            
 he'll find those bitter. So come, Medea,  
 call on all those things you know so well,  
 as you plan this and set it up. Let the work,  
 this deadly business, start. It's a test of wills.  
 You see what you have to put up with.  
 You must not let Jason's marriage make you  
 a laughing stock among Corinthians, compatriots of Sisyphus, for you  
 trace your family from a noble father  
 and from Helios, the sun. So get to work.  
 Besides, we have a woman's nature—  
 powerless to perform fine noble deeds,  
 but very skilled in all the forms of evil.  
CHORUS [chanting]  
 The waters in the sacred rivers                                                            
 are flowing in reverse.  
 And all well-ordered things  
 are once more turning on themselves. Men's plans are now deceitful,  
 their firm trust in the gods is gone.  
 My life is changing—common talk  
 is giving me a better reputation.  
 Honour's coming to the female sex.  
 Slander will no longer injure women.                                                   
 Those songs by ancient poets  
 will stop chanting of our faithlessness.  
 Phoebus, god of song and singing,  
 never put into our minds the gift of making sacred music with the lyre,  
 or else I would have sung a song  
 in response to what the male sex sings.  
 For our lengthy past has much to say  
 about men's lives as well as ours                                                          
 You sailed here from your father's house,  
 your heart on fire, past those two rocks  
 that stand guard to the Euxine Sea.  
 You live now in a foreign land.  
 You've lost your marriage bed, your husband, too, poor woman.  
 And now you're driven out,  
 hounded into exile in disgrace.  
 The honour in an oath has gone.  
 And all throughout wide Hellas                                                           
 there's no shame any more.  
 Shame has flown away to heaven.  
 So to you, unhappy lady,  
 no father's house is open,  
 no haven on your painful voyage. For now a stronger woman  
 rules in your household,  
 queen of his marriage bed.  
[Enter Jason]  
JASON  
 Right now is not the first time I've observed  
 how a harsh temper makes all things worse—  
 impossibly so. It's happened often.  
 You could've stayed here in this land and house,  
 if only you'd agreed to the arrangements,  
 showed some patience with those in command.  
 Now you're exiled for your stupid chatter.    
 Not that I care. You don't have to stop  
 calling Jason the worst man in the world.  
 But when you speak against the ruler here,  
 consider yourself very fortunate  
 that exile is your only punishment.  
 I've always tried to mollify the king—  
 he has a vicious temper—and have you stay.  
 But you just wouldn't stop this silly rage,  
 always slandering the royal house.  
 That's why you've got to leave the country. Anyway, I won't neglect my family.  
 I've come here, woman, looking out for you,                                       
 so you won't be thrown out with the children  
 in total need and lacking everything.  
 Exile brings with it all sorts of hardships.  
 Although you may well despise me now,  
 I could never have bad feelings for you.  
MEDEA  
 As a man you're the worst there is—that's all  
 I'll say about you, no trace of manhood.  
 You come to me now, you come at this point, when you've turned into the worst enemy  
 of the gods and me and the whole human race?  
 It isn't courage or firm resolution  
 to hurt your family and then confront them,                                        
 face to face, but a total lack of shame,  
 the greatest of all human sicknesses.  
 But you did well to come, for I will speak.  
 I'll unload my heart, describe your evil.  
 You listen. I hope you're hurt by what I say.  
 I'll begin my story at the very start. I saved your life—every Greek who sailed with you  
 on board that ship the Argo can confirm it—  
 when you'd been sent to bring under the yoke  
 the fire-breathing bulls, and then to sow  
 the fields of death. And I killed the dragon  
 guarding the Golden Fleece, coiled up there,                                       
 staying on watch and never going to sleep.  
 For you I raised the light which rescued you  
 from death. I left my father and my home,  
 on my own, and came with you to Iolcus, beneath Mount Pelion. My love for you  
 was greater than my wisdom. Then I killed  
 Pelias in the most agonizing way,  
 at the hands of his own daughters,  
 and then destroyed his household, all of it.  
 Now, after I've done all this to help you,  
 you brute, you betray me and help yourself  
 to some new wife. And we have children!  
 If you'd had no children, I'd understand                                               
 why you're so keen on marrying this girl. And what about the promises you made?  
 I don't know if you think the ancient gods  
 still govern, or if new regulations  
 have recently been put in place for men,  
 but you must know you've broken faith with me.  
 By this right hand, which you have often held,  
 and by my knees, at which you've often begged,  
 it was all for nothing to be touched like that,  
 by such a worthless man. I've lost all hope.  
 But come now. I'll sort things out with you, as if you were a friend. I've no idea  
 what sort of kindness to expect from you.                                           
 But let's see. The things I'll ask about  
 will make you look even more disgraceful.  
 Where do I now turn? To my father's house?  
 For your sake I betrayed my country,  
 to come here with you. Then should I go  
 to Pelias' daughters in their misery?  
 They'd surely welcome me with open arms,  
 since I killed their father. That's how things stand. To my family I'm now an enemy,  
 and by assisting you I declared war  
 on those whom I had no need to injure.  
 For all the ways I've helped you, you made me,  
 in the eyes of many wives in Greece,  
 a lucky woman, blessed in many things.  
 But what a wonderful and trusting husband                                         
 I have in you now, in my misfortune,  
 if I go into exile, leave this land,  
 with no friends, all alone, abandoned, with my abandoned children. And for you,  
 what a fine report for a new bridegroom,  
 his children wandering round like vagabonds  
 with the very woman who saved his life.  
 O Zeus, why did you give men certain ways  
 to recognize false gold, when there's no mark,  
 no token on the human body,  
 to indicate which men are worthless.  
CHORUS  
 When members of a family fight like this,                                            
 rage pushes them beyond all compromise.  
JASON  
 Woman, it seems I'll need to give good reasons,  
 and, like a skilled helmsman on a ship,  
 haul in my sails and run before that storm  
 blowing from your raving tongue. In my view,  
 you overestimate your favours to me.  
 I consider goddess Aphrodite  
 the only one of gods or mortal men  
 who saved my expedition. As for you,  
 well, you've a subtle mind. But if I told  
 how Eros with his unerring arrows    
 forced you to save me, I could injure you.  
 So I won't press the matter very far.  
 However you helped me, you did it well.  
 But by saving me you got in return  
 more than you gave, as I will demonstrate.  
 First of all, you now live among the Greeks,  
 not in a country of barbarians.  
 You're familiar with justice and the laws,  
 rather than brute force. Besides, all the Greeks  
 know that you're clever, so you've earned yourself a fine reputation. If you still lived                                                        
 out there at the boundary of the world,  
 no one would talk about you. And great fame  
 I'd sooner have than houses filled with gold,  
 or the power to sing sweet melodies,  
 sweeter than all the songs of Orpheus.  
 That's my response to you about my labours.  
 Remember you started this war of words.  
 As for your complaints about this marriage,  
 I'll show you that in this I'm being wise, and moderate, and very friendly to you,  
 and to my children. You must have patience.                                      
 When I came here from the land of Iolcus,  
 I brought with me many troubles, hard ones,  
 things impossible for me to deal with.  
 What greater good fortune could I have found  
 than marrying the daughter of the king,  
 me—an exile? On the point that irks you,  
 it's not the case I hate our marriage bed,  
 overcome with lust for some new bride, nor am I keen to rival other men  
 in the number of my many children.  
 We have enough. I'm not complaining.  
 The most important thing for us to do  
 is to live well and not in poverty,  
 knowing that everyone avoids a friend                                                 
 once he's a pauper. As for my children,  
 I want to raise them in the proper way,  
 one worthy of my house, to have brothers  
 for the children born from you, and make them all the same. Thus, with a united family  
 I might prosper. Do you need more children?  
 In my case, there's some benefit to have  
 new children to help those already born.  
 Was this a bad scheme? You'd agree with me,  
 if you weren't so upset about the sex.  
 But you women are so idiotic—  
 you think if everything is fine in bed,  
 you have all you need, but if the sex is bad,                                         
 then all the very best and finest things you make your enemies. What mortals need  
 is some other way to get our children.  
 There should be no female sex. With that,  
 men would be rid of all their troubles.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Jason, your reasons here seem logical,  
 but it strikes me, if I may presume,  
 you're in the wrong abandoning your wife.  
MEDEA  
 I'm very different from many others,  
 in all sorts of ways—in my opinion,  
 the unjust man who speaks so plausibly     
 brings on himself the harshest punishment.  
 Since he's sure his tongue can hide injustice,  
 he dares anything. But he's not that clever.  
 So you should not parade before me now  
 your clever words and specious reasoning.  
 One word demolishes your argument:
 if you were not corrupt, you'd ask me first,  
 get my consent to undertake this marriage,  
 but you didn't even tell your family.  
JASON  
 Oh yes, if I'd told you of the wedding, I'm sure you would have lent me fine support.  
 Even now you can't stand to set aside  
 that huge rage in your heart.                                                                
MEDEA  
 You're lying.  
 You thought as you grew old a barbarian wife  
 would bring you disrespect.  
JASON  
 Get this straight—  
 this royal bride I have, I didn't marry her  
 because of any woman. As I told you,  
 I wanted to save you and have children,  
 royal princes, with the same blood as my sons.  
 That way my house has more security.  
MEDEA  
 May I never want a merely prosperous life,  
 accepting pain or great wealth at the expense  
 of happiness here in my heart.  
JASON  
 Do you think                         
 you can change that prayer and sound more sensible?  
 You should not consider this advantage  
 painful, or pretend to be so wretched  
 when things are going well for you.  
MEDEA  
 Keep up the insults. You have your refuge.  
 I'm alone and banished from this country.  
JASON  
 That's what you've chosen. The blame rests with you.  
MEDEA  
 What did I do? Marry and desert you?  
JASON  
 You kept making all those bitter curses  
 against the ruling family here.  
MEDEA  
 And I'm a curse against your family, too.  
JASON  
 I'm not arguing with you any more                                                       
 about all this. But if you want me  
 to provide some money, some assistance  
 for you and the children in your exile,  
 just ask. I'm prepared to give you some,  
 and with a generous hand. I'll send my friends introductory tokens, so they'll treat you well.  
 You'd be mad not to accept this offer.  
 Woman, stop being so angry. If you do,  
 things will turn out so much better for you.  
MEDEA  
 I'll accept no assistance from your friends,  
 nor anything from you. Don't make the offer.  
 Gifts from a worthless man are without value.  
JASON  
 All right, but I call the gods to witness  
 I'm willing to help you and the children.                                              
 But you reject my goods and stubbornly push away your friends, and that the reason  
 you suffer still more pain.  
MEDEA  
 Get out of here.  
 For someone so in love with his new bride  
 you're spending far too long outside her home.  
 Go act married. The gods will see to it  
 your marriage will change into one of those  
 which makes you wish you'd turned it down.  
[Exit Jason]  
CHORUS  
 Love with too much passion  
 brings with it no fine reputation,  
 brings nothing virtuous to men. But if Aphrodite comes in smaller doses,                                             
 no other god is so desirable.  
 Goddess, I pray you never strike me  
 with one of those poisoned arrows  
 shot from that golden bow of yours.  
 I pray that moderation,  
 the gods' most beautiful gift,  
 will always guide me.  
 I pray that Aphrodite  
 never packs my heart with jealousy or angry quarreling.  
 May she never fill me with desire  
 for sex in other people's beds.  
 May she bless peaceful unions,                                                            
 using her wisdom to select  
 a woman's marriage bed.  
 O my country and my home,  
 I pray I never lack a city,  
 never face a hopeless life,  
 one filled with misery and pain. Before that comes, let death,  
 my death, deliver me,  
 bring my days to their fatal end.  
 For there's no affliction worse                                                             
 than losing one's own country.  
 I say on this based on what I've seen,  
 not on what other people say.  
 For you are here without a city—  
 you have no friends to pity you,  
 as you suffer in this misery, suffer in the harshest way.  
 The man who shames his family,                                                         
 who doesn't open up his heart  
 and treat them in all honesty—  
 may he perish unlamented.  
 With him I never could be friends.  
[Enter Aegeus, King of Athens]  
AEGEUS  
 I wish you all happiness, Medea.  
 There's no better way to greet one's friends.  
MEDEA  
 All happiness to you, too, Aegeus,  
 wise Pandion's son. Where are you coming from?  
AEGEUS  
 I've just left Apollo's ancient oracle.  
MEDEA  
 The prophetic centre of the earth?  
 What business took you there?  
AEGEUS  
 To ask a question.  
 I want to know how I can have some children.  
MEDEA  
 In the gods' name, have you lived so long                                            
 without ever having any children?  
AEGEUS  
 Not one. Some god is doing this to me.  
MEDEA  
 Do you have a wife? Or have you stayed unmarried?  
AEGEUS  
 No, I'm married. My wife shares my bed.  
MEDEA  
 So what did Apollo say about it? AEGEUS  
 Words too wise for human understanding.  
MEDEA  
 It is appropriate for me to learn them?  
AEGEUS  
 Of course. They need a clever mind like yours.  
MEDEA  
 What was the prophecy? Tell it to me—  
 if it's all right for me to hear.  
AEGEUS  
 He told me this:
"Don't untie the wineskin's foot. . ."  
MEDEA  
 Until when?  
 Until you do what or reach what country?                                           
AEGEUS  
". . . until you come back to your hearth and home."  
MEDEA  
 What were you looking for when you sailed here?  
AEGEUS  
 A man called Pittheus, king of Troezen.  
MEDEA  
 He's Pelops' son. They say he's a very holy man.  
AEGEUS  
 I want to share the god's prophecy with him.  
MEDEA  
 He's a wise man and skilled in things like that.  
AEGEUS  
 And the friendliest of all my allies.  
MEDEA  
 Well, good luck. I hope you find what you desire.  
AEGEUS  
 Why are your eyes so sad, your cheeks so pale?  
MEDEA  
 O Aegeus, my husband has been cruel—                                            
 of all men he's treated me the worst.  
AEGEUS  
 What are you saying? Tell me truly—  
 what things have made you so unhappy?  
MEDEA  
 Jason's abusing me. I've done him no harm.  
AEGEUS  
 What has he done? Give me more details.  
MEDEA  
 He's taken a new wife. She now rules his home,  
 instead of me.  
AEGEUS  
 That's completely shameful.  
 He hasn't dared something like that, has he?  
MEDEA  
 Indeed, he has. He's dishonored me, the wife  
 he used to love.  
AEGEUS  
 Is this a new love affair,  
 or did he get fed up with you in bed?  
MEDEA  
 A new love match—he's betrayed his family.  
AEGEUS  
 Leave him, then, since, as you say, he's worthless.  
MEDEA  
 His passion is to marry royalty.  
AEGEUS  
 Who's giving her to him? Tell me the rest.  
MEDEA  
 Creon, who rules this land of Corinth.  
AEGEUS  
 Then, lady, it's quite understandable  
 why you're in such distress.  
MEDEA  
 I'm done for, finished.  
 I'm being banished from this country.  
AEGEUS  
 By whom? You're speaking now of some new trouble.  
MEDEA  
 Creon is driving me out into exile,  
 shipping me off, away from Corinth.  
AEGEUS  
 With Jason's full consent? I find that disgraceful.  
MEDEA  
 He says not. Still, he's planning to accept it.  
 But, Aegeus, I beg you by your beard,  
 and at your knees implore you—have pity.                                          
 Take pity on me in my misfortune.  
 Don't let me be exiled without a friend.  
 Accept me as a suppliant in your home,  
 your native land. If you will take me in,  
 may the gods then answer your desire  
 to have children. May you die a happy man.  
 You don't know what a lucky one you are to find me here. I'll end your childlessness.  
 I know the sorts of medicines to use,  
 and I can help you have many children.  
AEGEUS  
 Lady, I'd like to grant this favour to you,  
 for many reasons. First, there's the gods.                                             
 Then, for the children you say I'll produce.  
 For there I've lost all sense of what to try.  
 Here's what I'll do. If you get to my country,  
 I'll strive to treat you as a foreign guest—  
 that's the proper thing for me to do. But, Medea, I'll give you fair warning:
 I won't plot to get you out of Corinth.  
 If you can reach my household on your own,  
 you may stay there in safety. Rest assured—  
 I won't surrender you to anyone.  
 But you must make your own escape from here.  
 I don't want my hosts finding fault with me.                                        
MEDEA  
 That's fine with me. If you could promise this,  
 you'd have done me all the good you can.  
AEGEUS  
 Don't you trust me? What in this still bothers you? MEDEA  
 I do trust you. But the house of Pelias  
 dislikes me, and so does Creon's, too.  
 If you bind yourself to a promise now,  
 you'll not hand me over when they come,  
 seeking to remove me from your country.  
 If you use words, and don't swear by the gods,  
 you may become their friend and then comply  
 with their political demands. I'm weak,  
 and they have wealth, a king's resources.                                            
AEGEUS  
 What you've just said is very shrewd. All right, if it's what you want, I'm not unwilling  
 to do what you require. Your proposal  
 gives me some security. I can show  
 those hostile to you I've a good excuse.  
 And it makes your position safer.  
 Tell me the gods that I should swear by.  
MEDEA  
 Swear by the plain of Earth, by Helios,  
 my father's father, by the family of gods,  
 by all of them collectively.  
AEGEUS  
 Tell me  
 what I must swear to do and not to do.  
MEDEA     
 Never to cast me out from your own country.  
 And if some enemy of mine asks you                                                   
 if he can take me off, you'll not agree,  
 not while you're still alive.  
AEGEUS  
 I swear—  
 by the Earth, by Helios' sacred light,  
 by all the gods—I'll do what I've just heard.  
MEDEA  
 That's good. And if you betray this promise,  
 what happens to you then?  
AEGEUS  
 May I then suffer  
 the punishment that falls on profane men.  
MEDEA  
 All is well. Now, go your way in peace. I'll come to your city as quickly as I can,  
 once I've completed what I mean to do,  
 and my plans here have been successful.  
[Exit Aegeus]  
CHORUS LEADER  
 May Hermes, noble son of Maia,  
 go with you on your return, Aegeus.                                                    
 I hope you'll get what your heart's so set on,  
 for in my eyes you're a worthy man.  
MEDEA  
 Oh Zeus, and Justice, child of Zeus,  
 and flaming Helios—now, my friends,  
 we'll triumph over all my enemies. The plans I've made have been set in motion.  
 I'm confident my enemies will pay,  
 they'll get their punishment. For at the point  
 when I was most in trouble, this man came  
 and helped me plan safe harbour for myself.  
 I'll lash my ship's cable to Aegeus,                                                       
 once I've made it to Athena's city.  
 Now I'll tell you all the things I'm planning—  
 though you'll get little pleasure from my words.  
 I'm going to send one of my household slaves to ask Jason to come and visit me.  
 Once he's here, my words will reassure him.  
 I'll tell him I agree with what he's doing,  
 that leaving me for this royal alliance  
 is a fine idea—he's acted properly  
 and made the right decisions. Then I'll ask                                          
 if my children can remain. My purpose  
 is not to leave them in a hostile land  
 surrounded by insulting enemies,  
 but a trick to kill the daughter of the king. For I'll send the children to her with gifts.  
 They'll carry presents for the bride, as if  
 requesting to be spared their banishment—  
 a finely woven robe and a tiara  
 of twisted gold. If she accepts those presents  
 and puts them on, she'll die—and painfully.  
 And so will anyone touching the girl.  
 I've smeared strong poisons on those gifts.  
 So much for that. I'll say no more about her.                                       
 But the next thing I'll do fills me with pain— I'm going to kill my children.  
There's no one  
 can save them now. And when I've done this,  
 wiped out Jason's house completely, I'll leave,  
 evading the punishment I'd receive  
 for murdering my darling children,  
 a sacrilegious crime. You see, my friends,  
 I won't accept my enemies' contempt.  
 So be it. What good does life hold for me now?  
 I have no father, no home, no refuge.  
 I was wrong to leave my father's house,     
 won over by the words of that Greek man,  
 who now, with the gods' help, will pay the price.  
 He'll never see his children alive again,  
 the ones I bore him, nor have more children  
 with his new bride, for she's been marked to die  
 an agonizing death, poisoned by my drugs.  
 Let no one think that I'm a trivial woman,  
 a feeble one who sits there passively.  
 No, I'm a different sort—dangerous  
 to enemies, but well disposed to friends. Lives like mine achieve the greatest glory.                                           
CHORUS LEADER  
 Since you've shared your plans with me, I urge you  
 not to do this. I want to help you,  
 holding to the standards of human law.  
MEDEA  
 In this matter there's no choice. I forgive  
 what you just said, because, unlike me,  
 you don't have to bear this suffering.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 But, lady, can you stand to kill your children?  
MEDEA  
 Yes. It will be a mortal blow to Jason.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 But as a woman it will devastate you.  
MEDEA  
 That's beside the point. Until that time  
 it's useless to continue talking.  
[Medea goes to door of the house and calls inside]  
 You in there . . .  
[Enter Nurse from the house]  
. . . go now and fetch Jason here.  
 When I need to trust someone, I choose you.  
 Tell him nothing of what I mean to do,  
 if you like your mistress and are a woman.  
[Exit Medea into the house and the Nurse off stage]  
CHORUS [chanting]  
 Since ancient times, Erechtheus' sons  
 have been especially blessed,  
 children of the sacred gods,  
 from a holy country never conquered, never ransacked by its enemies.  
 Fed on glorious fruits of wisdom,  
 they stride lithely through the sunlit air,                                              
 where, so the story goes, the Muses,  
 nine maidens of Pieria, gave birth  
 to golden-haired Hermione.  
 And people celebrate how Aphrodite,  
 while drawing water from the stream,  
 the flowing river of the lovely Cephissus,  
 breathes down upon the land sweet, temperate winds,                                                                       
 while she binds within her hair  
 garlands of sweet-smelling roses,  
 sending Love to sit at Wisdom's side,  
 to foster all fine things.  
 How will this city of sacred streams,  
 this land of strolling lovers,  
 welcome you—a killer,  
 who slaughtered her own children,  
 an unholy woman—among its people?    
 Consider this—the killing of your children.  
 Consider the murder you are going to do.  
 By your knees we beg you,  
 in every way we know,  
 do not slaughter your own children.  
 Where will your hands and heart  
 find the strength, the courage  
 to dare this dreadful action?  
 How will you look at them,                                                                 
 your children, and not weep for their murderous fate?  
 When they kneel before you,  
 and implore your mercy,  
 you'll find it impossible  
 to steel your heart, 
 then soak your hands  
 in your own children's blood.  
[Enter Medea from the house and, from the side, Jason with the Nurse]  
JASON  
 I've come, as you requested. You hate me,  
 but I'm here, and I'm prepared to listen.  
 Woman, what it is you now want from me?  
MEDEA  
 Jason, I ask you to forgive me  
 for what I said before. My anger                                                           
 you should be able to put up with,  
 since we two have shared many acts of love.  
 I've been debating with myself. I realize  
 I've been in the wrong. I tell myself,  
"I'm a fool. Why am I in such a rage,  
 resenting those who offer good advice?  
 Why fight against the rulers of this land,  
 or against my husband, whose actions serve my own best interests with this royal marriage,  
 producing brothers for my children?  
 Why can't I stop being angry? What's wrong with me,  
 when gods are being so kind? Don't I have children?                          
 Don't I know we're going into exile,  
 where friends are hard to find?"  
With thoughts like these,  
 I recognized how foolish I had been,  
 how senseless it was to be so annoyed.  
 So now I agree with you. It strikes me  
 you've been acting prudently, by forging this marriage link on our behalf. I was mad.  
 I should have worked with you in this design,  
 helped you with your plans, stood there beside you  
 in this marriage, rejoiced along with you  
 for this union with your bride. But women are,  
 well, I won't say bad—we are what we are.  
 You shouldn't copy the bad things we do,                                           
 repaying foolishness with foolishness.  
 So I give in. I admit that I was wrong.  
 But now I see things in a better light.  
[Medea goes to the door of the house and calls inside]  
 Children, come out here—leave the house.  
[Enter the children with the Tutor]  
 Come on out. Welcome your father here—  
 talk to him with me. You and your mother  
 will end the bad blood we've had in this family.  
 We've patched things up, and no one's angry now.  
 Take his right hand. Oh, it's harsh to think                                          
 of what the future hides.  
[Medea hugs her children]  
 Oh my children,  
 will you keep holding your dear arms out like this  
 through all the many years you have to live?  
 Oh dear, I'm just too tearful, too afraid! My delicate eyes keep filling up with tears,  
 now I've stopped this quarrel with your father.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 My eyes, too, begin to weep pale tears.  
 May this bad luck proceed no further.  
JASON  
 Lady, I approve of what you're saying now.  
 Not that I blame you for what went on before.  
 For it's quite natural in the female sex  
 to get angry when their husbands set up  
 secret schemes to plan another secret marriage.                                  
 But your heart has changed now for the better. Although it took a while, you understand  
 the wiser course of action. In doing so,  
 you're acting like a woman of good sense.  
 Now, as for you, my children, your father  
 has not been neglectful. With the gods' help,  
 I've made secure provision for you.  
 At some future date, you'll be leaders here,  
 in Corinth, alongside your new brothers.  
 But first you must grow up. As for the rest,  
 your father and the god who smiles on him will take care of that. I pray I see you                                                  
 mature into fine young men, victorious  
 over all my enemies.  
[Medea starts to weep]  
 Medea,  
 why turn away? Why weep and fill your eyes  
 with these pale tears? What I have said,  
 does that not make you happy?  
MEDEA  
 It's nothing.  
 I was thinking of the children.  
JASON  
 Cheer up.  
 I will see that they are well looked after.  
MEDEA  
 I will cheer up. I trust what you have said.  
 But it's a woman's nature to shed tears. JASON  
 But why be so tearful with the boys?  
MEDEA  
 I gave birth to them. When you made that prayer                                
 about them growing up, I felt pity,  
 wondering how things would turn out for them.  
 But let's discuss the reasons for your visit.  
 I've mentioned some. Now I'll let you know the rest.  
 Since the rulers here are keen to banish me,  
 I recognize the best thing I can do  
 is try not to stand in their way or yours,  
 by staying here. This royal house thinks me their enemy. So I've made up my mind  
 to leave this country and go into exile.  
 But you should beg Creon to spare our boys,  
 not banish them, so they can grow up here,                                         
 under your direction.  
JASON  
 Well, I don't know  
 if I can convince him. But I should try.  
MEDEA  
 You could tell your wife to ask her father  
 not to send the children into exile.  
JASON  
 A good idea. I think I can persuade her.  
MEDEA  
 You will, if she's a woman like the rest. And I'll give you some help. I'll send her gifts,  
 by far the finest human gifts I know,  
 a finely woven gown, a diadem  
 of twisted gold. The boys will take them.  
 One of my servants must fetch them here—                                       
[Medea gestures to a servant]  
 You—bring me those presents right away.  
[Servant goes into the house]  
 She's got more than one reason to be happy,  
 that wife of yours. She's blessed in countless ways.  
 In you she's found a very worthy man  
 to share her bed—and now she gets these gifts, which my grandfather Helios once gave  
 to his descendants.  
[The servant returns with the gifts. Medea takes them and hands them over to her children]  
 Come, children,  
 take up these wedding gifts and carry them  
 as offerings to the happy royal bride.  
 What she's getting will be worthy of her.  
JASON  
 What are you doing, you foolish woman,  
 disposing of these things of yours? Do you think  
 the royal house lacks clothes or gold? Keep them.                               
 Don't give them away. If my wife values me,  
 she'll set more store on what I want to do than on rich possessions. I'm sure of that.  
MEDEA  
 Don't say that. Even the gods, they claim,  
 are won by gifts. And among mortal men,  
 gold works more wonders than a thousand words.  
 Her fortune's on the rise. Gods favour her.  
 She's young, with royal power to command.  
 But to spare my children banishment,  
 I'd trade more than gold. I'd give my life.  
 Now, children, when you get inside the palace,  
 you must beg this new wife of your father's,   
 my mistress, not to send you into exile.  
 When you present these gifts, your must make sure  
 she takes them from you herself, in her own hands.  
 Now go and be quick about it. Good luck!  
 Bring your mother back news of your success,  
 the happy news she so desires to hear.  
[Exit Jason and the children, with the Nurse and Tutor]  
CHORUS  
 I've no longer any hope  
 that these children stay alive,  
 as they stroll to their own slaughter.  
 The bride will take her diadem, she'll take her golden ruin.  
 With her own hand she'll fix  
 across her lovely yellow hair                                                                
 the jewelry of death.  
 The unearthly gleam, the charm  
 will tempt her to put on the robe  
 and ornament of twisted gold.  
 Her marriage bed will lie among the dead.  
 That's the trap she'll fall in.  
 That's how she'll die. She can't escape destruction.  
 And you, unlucky man,                                                                        
 married to the daughter of a king—  
 how ignorant you are right now,  
 bringing death to both your sons,  
 to your bride an agonizing end.  
 You most unfortunate man,  
 how wrong you were about your destiny.  
 Next, I mourn your sorrows,  
 unhappy mother of these children, intent on slaughtering your sons,  
 because your lawless husband  
 left you and your marriage bed                                                             
 and now lives with another wife.  
[Enter the Tutor with the children]  
TUTOR  
 My lady, your children won't be exiled.  
 The royal bride was happy to accept,  
 with own hands, the gifts you sent her.  
 Now the boys have made their peace with her.  
[Medea starts to weep]  
 What's wrong? Why do you stand there in distress?  
 Things have worked out well. Why turn away again? Aren't you happy to hear my splendid news?  
MEDEA  
 Alas . . .  
TUTOR  
 An odd response to the news I bring.  
MEDEA  
 All I can say is I'm so sad . . . .  
TUTOR  
 Have I mistakenly said something bad?  
 Am I wrong to think my news is good?                                                
MEDEA  
 You've reported what you had to tell me.  
 I'm not blaming you.  
TUTOR  
 Then why avert your eyes?  
 Why are you crying?  
MEDEA  
 Old man, I have my reasons.  
 The gods and I, with my worst intentions,  
 have brought about this situation.  
TUTOR  
 Be happy. Your children will one day  
 bring you back home again.  
MEDEA  
 But before that,  
 I shall bring others to their homes—alas,  
 how miserable I feel.  
TUTOR  
 You're not the only mother whose children  
 have been separated from her. We mortals  
 must bear our bad times patiently.  
MEDEA  
 I'll do so.  
 But now go in the house. And carry on.  
 Give the children their usual routine.                                                  
[Tutor exits into the house. The children remain with Medea]  
 Oh children, my children, you still have a city and a home, where you can live,  
 once you've left me in wretched suffering.  
 You can live on here without your mother.  
 But I'll go to some other country,  
 an exile, before I've had my joy in you,  
 before I've seen you happy, or helped  
 to decorate your marriage beds, your brides,  
 your bridal chambers, or lifted high  
 your wedding torches. How miserable  
 my self-will has made me. I raised you— and all for nothing. The work I did for you,  
 the cruel hardships, pains of childbirth—                                            
 all for nothing. Once, in my foolishness,  
 I had many hopes in you—it's true—  
 that you'd look after me in my old age,  
 that you'd prepare my corpse with your own hands,  
 in the proper way, as all people wish.  
 But now my tender dreams have been destroyed.  
 For I'll live my life without you both,  
 in sorrow. And those loving eyes of yours will never see your mother any more.  
 Your life is changing. Oh, my children,                                               
 why are you looking at me in that way?  
 Why smile at me—that last smile of yours?  
 Alas, what shall I do? You women here,  
 my heart gives way when I see those eyes,  
 my children's smiling eyes. I cannot do it.  
 Good bye to those previous plans of mine.  
 I'll take my children from this country.  
 Why harm them as a way to hurt their father and have to suffer twice his pain myself?  
 No, I won't do that. And so farewell  
 to what I planned before. But what's going on?  
 What's wrong with me? Do I really want  
 my enemies escaping punishment,                                                       
 while I become someone they ridicule?  
 I will go through with this. What a coward  
 I am even to let my heart admit  
 such sentimental reasons. Children,  
 you must go into the house.                                                  
[The children move toward the house but remain at the door, looking at Medea]  
 Anyone forbidden to attend my sacrifice, let such a man  
 concern himself about these children.  
 My hand will never lack the strength for this.  
 And yet . . . My heart, don't do this murder.  
 You're made of stone, but leave the boys alone.  
 Spare my children. If they remain alive,  
 with me in Athens, they'll make you happy.  
 No! By those avengers in lower Hell,  
 I'll never deliver up my children,                                                          
 hand them over to their enemies, to be humiliated. They must die—  
 that's unavoidable, no matter what.  
 Since that must happen, then their mother,  
 the one who gave them life, will kill them.  
 At all events it's settled. There's no way out.  
 On her head the royal bride already wears  
 the poisoned crown. That dress is killing her.  
 But I'm treading an agonizing path,  
 and send my children on one even worse.  
 What I want to do now is say farewell.  
[Medea moves to the children near the door, kneels down and hugs them]  
 Give me your right hands, children. Come on.                                    
 Let your mother kiss them. Oh, these hands—  
 how I love them—and how I love these mouths,  
 faces—the bearing of such noble boys.  
 I wish you happiness—but somewhere else.  
 Where you live now your father takes away.  
 Oh this soft embrace! Their skin's so tender.  
 My boys' breathing smells so sweet to me.  
 But you must go inside. Go. I can't stand  
 to look at you any more like this. The evil done to me has won the day.  
 I understand too well the dreadful act  
 I'm going to commit, but my judgment  
 can't check my anger, and that incites  
 the greatest evils human beings do.                                                     
[Medea shepherds the children into the house, leaving the Chorus alone on stage]  
CHORUS  
 Often, before this present time,  
 I've gone into more complex arguments,  
 I've struggled with more serious issues,  
 than my female sex should try to probe.  
 But we, too, have an artistic Muse. She lives with us to teach us wisdom.  
 But not with all of us—the group of women  
 able to profit from our Muse is small—  
 in a crowd of women you might find one.  
 And I claim that with human beings                                                    
 those with no experience of children,  
 those who have never given birth,  
 such people have far more happiness  
 than those who have been parents.  
 With those who have no children, because they never come to see  
 whether their children grow up  
 to be a blessing or a curse to men,  
 their failure to have offspring  
 keeps many troubles from them.  
 But those who in their own homes  
 have a sweet race of children growing,  
 I see them worn down with cares                                                        
 their whole life long. First,  
 how they can raise their children well. Next, how they can leave their sons  
 a means of livelihood. And then,  
 it's by no means clear that all the work  
 produces good or useless children.  
 There's one final problem,  
 the worst for any mortal human—  
 I'll tell you: suppose those parents  
 have found a sufficient way of life,  
 and seen their children grow  
 into strong, young, virtuous men, if Fate so wills it, Death comes,                                                           
 carries off the children's bodies,  
 away to Hades. What profit, then,  
 is there for us and our love of sons,  
 if the gods inflict on mortal men,  
 in addition to their other troubles,  
 this most painful extra grief.  
[Enter Medea from the house]  
MEDEA  
 My friends, I've long been waiting in suspense  
 to see what's happening in the royal house.  
 Now I see one of Jason's servants coming. His hard rapid breathing indicates to me  
 he's bringing news of some fresh disaster.                                            
[Enter the Messenger, coming from the royal palace]  
MESSENGER  
 Medea, you must escape—leave this place.  
 You've done an awful deed, broken every law.  
 Take ship and go by sea—or go overland  
 by chariot. But you must go from here.  
MEDEA  
 What's happened that I have to run away?  
MESSENGER  
 The king's daughter has just been destroyed,  
 her father, too—Creon. You poisoned them.  
MEDEA  
 What really splendid news you bring. From now on, I'll consider you a friend,  
 one of my benefactors.  
MESSENGER  
 What's that?  
 Are you in your right mind, lady, or insane?  
 To commit this crime against the royal house,                                    
 and then be happy when you hear the news,  
 without being afraid?  
MEDEA  
 I have some remarks to offer in reply.  
 But, my friend, don't be in such a hurry.  
 Tell me of their deaths. If you report  
 they died in pain, you'll double my rejoicing.  
MESSENGER  
 When your two children came with their father  
 and went in the bride's home, we servants,  
 who had shared in your misfortune, were glad,  
 for a rumour spread at once from ear to ear  
 that you and your husband's previous quarrel                                      
 was now over. Someone kissed the boys' hands,  
 someone else their golden hair. In my joy,  
 I went with the children right inside,  
 into the women's quarters. Our mistress,  
 whom we now look up to instead of you, before she caught sight of your two children,  
 wanted to fix her eyes on Jason only.  
 But then she veiled her eyes and turned away  
 her white cheek, disgusted that they'd come.  
 Your husband tried to change the young bride's mood,                       
 to soften her anger, with these words,  
"Don't be so hard-hearted with your family.  
 Check your anger, and turn your face this way,  
 look at us again, and count as friends of yours  
 those your husband thinks are friends of his. Now, receive these gifts, and then, for my sake,  
 beg your father not to exile these two boys."  
 Once she saw the gifts, she did not hold out,  
 but agreed in everything with Jason.  
 And before your children and their father  
 had gone any distance from the palace,  
 she took the richly embroidered gown  
 and put it on, then arranged the golden crown,                                    
 fixing it in her hair at a bright mirror,  
 smiling at her body's lifeless image there. Then she stood up from her seat and strolled  
 across the room, moving delicately  
 on her pale feet, delighted with the gifts,  
 with a great many glances to inspect  
 the straightness of the dress against her legs.  
 But then it happened—a horrific sight.  
 She changed colour, staggered back and sideways,  
 trembling, then fell into her chair again,  
 almost collapsing on the floor. An old woman,                                    
 one of her servants, thinking it was a fit inspired by Pan or by some other god,  
 shouted in festive joy, until she saw  
 the white spit foaming in her mouth, her eyes  
 bulging from their sockets, and her pale skin  
 quite drained of blood. The servant screamed again—  
 this time, to make up for her former shout,  
 she cried out in distress. Another slave  
 ran off at once towards her father's palace,  
 and another to the girl's new husband  
 to tell him the grim fate his bride had met. The whole house rang with people's footsteps,                                    
 as they hurried back and forth. By the time  
 it would take a fast runner to complete  
 two hundred yards and reach the finish line,  
 her eyes opened—the poor girl woke up,  
 breaking her silent fit with a dreadful scream.  
 She was suffering a double agony—  
 around her head the golden diadem  
 shot out amazing molten streams of fire  
 burning everything, and the fine woven robe, your children's gift, consumed the poor girl's flesh.  
 She jumped up from the chair and ran away,                                       
 all of her on fire, tossing her head, her hair,  
 this way and that, trying to shake off  
 her golden crown—but it was fixed in place,  
 and when she shook her hair, the fire blazed  
 twice as high. Then she fell down on the ground,  
 overcome by the disaster. No one  
 could recognize her, except her father.  
 Her eyes had lost their clear expression, her face had changed. And there was blood  
 on top her head, dripping down, mixed with fire.  
 The flesh was peeling from her bones, chewed off  
 by the poison's secret jaws, just like resin                                            
 oozing from a pine tree. An appalling sight!  
 Everyone was too afraid to touch the corpse—  
 what we'd seen had warned us. But her father,  
 poor wretch, didn't know what she's been through.  
 He came unexpectedly into the house  
 and stumbled on the corpse. He cried aloud, embraced his daughter, and kissed her, saying,  
"My poor child, what god has been so cruel  
 to destroy you in this way? Who's taken you  
 away from me, an old man near my death?  
 Oh my child, I wish I could die with you."  

 He ended his lamenting cries. But then,  
 when he tried to raise his old body up,  
 he was entangled in that woven dress,  
 like ivy wrapped around a laurel branch.  
 He struggled dreadfully, trying to get up onto his knees, but she held him down.  
 If he used force, he tore his ancient flesh  
 clear off his bones. The poor man at last gave up.  
 His breathing stopped, for he couldn't stand the pain  
 a moment longer. So the two of them lie dead—  
 the daughter, her old father, side by side.                                            
 It's horrible, something to make one weep.  
 Concerning you there's nothing I will say.  
 For you'll know well enough the punishment  
 that's coming to you. As for human life, it seems to me, and not for the first time,  
 nothing but shadows. And I might say,  
 without feeling any fear, those mortals  
 who seem wise, who prepare their words with care,  
 are guilty of the greatest foolishness.  
 Among human beings no one is happy.  
 Wealth may flow in to produce a man  
 more lucky than another, but no man,                                                 
 is ever happy, no one.  
[Exit Messenger]  
CHORUS LEADER  
 This is the day, it seems, the god tightens trouble around Jason,  
 and justly so. Oh poor Creon's daughter,  
 how we pity your misfortune. You're gone,  
 down in Hades' home—the price you pay  
 for marrying Jason.  
MEDEA  
 I've made up my mind, my friends.  
 I'll do it—kill my children now, without delay,  
 and flee this land. I must not hesitate.  
 That will hand them over to someone else,  
 to be slaughtered by a hand less loving. No matter what, the children have to die.  
 Since that's the case, then I, who gave them life,                                
 will kill them. Arm yourself for this, my heart.  
 Why do I put off doing this dreadful act,  
 since it must be done? Come, pick up the sword,  
 wretched hand of mine. Pick up the sword,  
 move to where your life of misery begins.  
 Don't play the coward. Don't remember now  
 how much you love them, how you gave them life.  
 For this short day forget they are your children— and mourn them later. Although you kill them,  
 still you loved them. As a woman, I'm so sad.                                     
[Exit Medea into the house]  
CHORUS  
 Hail to Earth,  
 Hail to the Sun,  
 whose rays illuminate all things.  
 Turn your eyes, look down,  
 see this destroying woman,  
 before she sets her bloody hands,  
 her instruments of murder,  
 onto her own children, those offshoots of your golden race.  
 It's a fearful thing for men  
 to spill the blood of gods.  
 O light which comes from Zeus,  
 stop her, take from the house  
 this blood-thirsty savage Fury  
 gripped by the spirit of revenge.                                                           
 The pain you felt in giving birth  
 was useless, wasted.  
 Those children you so love, you bore them all in vain.  
 You who left behind you  
 the inhospitable passage  
 where the Symplegades dance,  
 those deadly, dark-blue rocks,  
 you unhappy woman,  
 why does your anger  
 fall so heavily upon your heart,  
 and one harsh murder  
 follow so quickly on another? The polluting moral stain  
 that taints all mortal men  
 who shed their family blood  
 upon the earth—that's hard to bear.  
 For the gods send down  
 onto the houses of the ones who kill  
 sorrows to match their crimes.                                                             
CHILD [from inside the house]  
 Help me . . . help . . .  
CHORUS  
 Did you hear that?  
 Did you hear the children cry?  
 That wretched, evil woman!  
CHILD [from within]  
 What do I do? How can I escape  
 my mother's hands?  
SECOND CHILD  
 I don't know, dear brother.  
 It's over for us . . .  
CHORUS [shouting in response]  
 Should I go in the house?  
 I'm sure I must prevent this murder.  
CHILD  
 Yes—for the love of gods, stop this! And hurry!  
SECOND CHILD  
 The sword has almost got us—like a snare!  
CHORUS  
 You hard and wretched woman,  
 just like stone or iron—  
 to kill your children,                                                                             
 ones you bore yourself, sealing their fate with your own hands.  
 Of all women that ever lived before  
 I know of one, of only one,  
 who laid hands on her dear children—  
 and that was Ino,  
 driven to madness by the gods,  
 when Hera, Zeus' wife,  
 sent her wandering in a fit  
 away from home,  
 that sad lady leapt into the sea, because she'd killed her sons  
 a most unholy murder.  
 She walked into the surf  
 at the sea's edge, perishing  
 so she could join in death  
 her own two children.  
 But what horror still remains  
 after what's happened here?  
 A woman's marriage bed—                                                                  
 so full of pain—how many evils, has it brought on humankind?  
[Enter Jason with attendants]  
JASON  
 You women standing there beside the house,  
 where's Medea, who's done these awful things?  
 Is she still inside? Or has she left here?  
 She'll have to hide herself under the earth,  
 or else fly up to heaven's overarching vault,  
 if she's going to avoid her punishment  
 from the royal house. Did she really think  
 she could kill the rulers of this country  
 and get away unharmed? But at this point   
 she's no concern of mine. I'm worried  
 for my children. Those whom she has wronged  
 will take care of her. I've come for the boys,  
 to save their lives, in case the next of kin  
 try to harm me and mine, retribution  
 for their mother's profane murders.  
CHORUS  
 Unhappy man, you don't know the full extent  
 of your misfortune, or you would not say this.  
JASON  
 What is it? Does she plan to kill me, too?  
CHORUS  
 Your boys are dead, killed by their mother's hand.  
JASON  
 No. What are you saying? Woman,                                                      
 you have destroyed me.  
CHORUS  
 The boys are dead.  
 You must fix your mind on that. They're gone.  
JASON  
 Where did she do this? Inside or outside?  
CHORUS  
 Open the doors and you will see them,  
 your slaughtered children.  
  
JASON [shouting into the house, as he shakes the doors]  
 You slaves in there,  
 remove the bar from this door at once,  
 withdraw the bolts, so I may see two things—  
 my dead sons and their murderer, that woman  
 on whom I shall exact revenge.  
  
[Jason shakes the doors of the house, which remain closed. Medea appears in a winged chariot, rising above the house. The bodies of the two children are visible in the chariot]  
  
MEDEA  
 Why are you rattling the doors like that,  
 trying to unbar them so you can find  
 their bodies and me, the one who killed them?  
 Stop trying. If you want something from me,  
 then say so, if you want to. But you'll never                                        
 have me in your grasp, not in this chariot,  
 a gift to me from my grandfather Helios,  
 to protect me from all hostile hands.  
JASON  
 You accursed woman, most hateful  
 to the gods and me and all mankind.  
 You dared to take the sword to your own boys, you—the one who bore them—and to leave me  
 destroyed and childless. Having done this,  
 after committing this atrocious crime,  
 can you still look upon the earth and sun?  
 May you be destroyed! Now I understand—  
 I must have lost my mind to bring you here,  
 from that savage country, to a Greek home.                                       
 You were truly evil then—you betrayed  
 your father and the land that raised you.  
 But the avenging fury meant for you the gods have sent to me. You slaughtered  
 your brother in your home, then came aboard  
 our fine ship, the Argo. That's how you began.  
 When you married me and bore my children,  
 in your lust for sex and our marriage bed,  
 you killed them. No woman from Greece would dare  
 to do this, but I chose you as my wife                                                 
 above them all, and that has proved to be  
 a hateful marriage—it has destroyed me.  
 You're not a woman. You're a she-lion. Your nature is more bestial than Scylla,  
 the Tuscan monster. But my insults,  
 multiplied a thousand fold, don't hurt you.  
 Your heart's too hard for that. So be off,  
 you shameful murderer of your children.  
 Let me lament my fate. I'll get no delight  
 from my new bride, nor will I ever speak  
 to my own living children, the two boys  
 I bred and raised. They're lost to me.                                                  
MEDEA  
 I would reply to your words at length, if father Zeus did not already know  
 what I did for you and what you did to me.  
 You weren't going to shame my marriage bed  
 and have a pleasant life ridiculing me.  
 Nor was that royal bride or Creon,  
 who gave her to you, going to banish me,  
 throw me from here with impunity.  
 So if you want, call me a lioness  
 or Scylla, who lives on Tuscan shores.  
 For I've made contact with your heart at last.    
JASON  
 You have your own share of pain and sorrow.  
MEDEA  
 That's true. But there's relief in knowing  
 you cannot laugh at me.  
JASON  
 O my children,  
 you had such an evil mother!  
MEDEA  
 O my children,  
 victims of your father's evil actions!  
JASON  
 At least it was not my hand that killed them.  
MEDEA  
 No. It was an insult—your new marriage.  
JASON  
 Was it right to murder them for that?  
MEDEA  
 Do you think that insult to a woman  
 is something insignificant?  
JASON  
 Yes, I do, to a woman with good sense. But to you  
 it's completely evil.  
MEDEA  
 Well, your sons are gone.  
 That should cause you pain.                                                                
JASON  
 I think their spirits live  
 to take out their revenge on you.  
MEDEA  
 The gods are aware who began this fight.  
JASON  
 Yes, they well know your detested heart.  
MEDEA  
 Keep up your hate. How I loathe your voice.  
JASON  
 And I hate yours. It won't be difficult  
 for the two of us to part.  
MEDEA  
 Tell me how.  
 What shall I do? For that's what I want, too.  
JASON  
 Let me bury these dead boys and mourn them.  
MEDEA  
 Never. My own hands will bury them.  
 I'll take them to Hera's sacred lands  
 in Acraia, so no enemy of mine  
 will commit sacrilege against them  
 by tearing up their graves. And in this place,                                       
 this land of Sisyphus, I'll initiate  
 a solemn celebration, with mystic rites,  
 future atonement for this wicked murder.  
 I'll now go to the land of Erechtheus, to live with Aegeus, son of Pandion.  
 As for you, you'll have a miserable death,  
 as is fitting for a coward. Now you've seen  
 the bitter ending of your marriage to me,  
 your head will be smashed in, when you're hit  
 by a moldy relic of your ship the Argo.  
JASON  
 May the avenging Fury of our children  
 destroy you—may you find blood justice.                                            
MEDEA  
 What god or spirit listens to you,  
 a man who doesn't keep his promises, a man who deceives and lies to strangers?  
JASON  
 You polluted wretch! Child killer!  
MEDEA  
 Go home.  
 Bury that wife of yours.  
JASON  
 I'll go.  
 I've lost both my sons.  
MEDEA  
 Your grief's not yet begun.  
 Wait until you're old.  
JASON  
 Oh such loving children!  
MEDEA  
 Their mother loved them. You did not.  
JASON  
 And yet you killed them?  
MEDEA  
 Yes, to injure you.  
JASON  
 Alas, how I long to see my dear boys' faces,  
 to hold them in my arms.                                                                     
MEDEA  
 So now, at this point,  
 you'll talk to them, you'll give them an embrace. Before this, you shoved them from you.  
JASON  
 By the gods,  
 I beg you, let me feel their tender skin.  
MEDEA  
 No. Your words are wasted.  
JASON  
 O Zeus,  
 do you hear how I'm being driven off,  
 what I must endure from this child killer,  
 this she lion, this abomination?  
 But I'll use the strength I have for grieving  
 and praying to the gods to bear witness                                              
 how you have killed my children and refuse  
 to let me hold their bodies or bury them. How I wish I'd never been a father  
 and had to see you kill my children.  
[Medea's chariot takes her and the children up and away from the scene. Exit Jason]  
CHORUS  
 Zeus on Olympus,  
 dispenses many things.     
 Gods often contradict  
 our fondest expectations.  
 What we anticipate  
 does not come to pass.  
 What we don't expect  
 some god finds a way to make it happen.  
 So with this story.  
[Exit Chorus]  
 

  

