# Electra {#euripides_book-electra}  
  
C> *This edition is based on the [publicly available](http://records.viu.ca/~Johnstoi/euripides/electra.htm) translation by Ian Johnston*  
  

*For some background information on the House of Atreus, see [this section](#intro-house-of-atreus)*  
  
...  

  
**DRAMATIS PERSONAE**  

**PEASANT**: a poor farmer in the countryside  
**ELECTRA**: daughter of Agamemnon and Clytaemnestra, married to the Peasant  
**ORESTES**: son of Agamemnon and Clytaemnestra, brother of Electra  
**PYLADES**: a friend of Orestes  
**CHORUS**: Argive country women  
**OLD MAN**: an old servant of Agamemnon’s who rescued Orestes  
**MESSENGER**: one of Orestes’ servants  
**CLYTAEMNESTRA**: mother of Orestes and Electra.  
**DIOSCOURI** (Castor and Polydeuces): divine twin brothers of Helen and Clytaemnestra  
**SERVANTS**: attendants for Orestes, Pylades, and Clytaemnestra  
  
*[The scene is set in the countryside of Argos, in front of the Peasant’s hut. It is just before dawn.]*  
  
  

PEASANT  
 O this old land, these streams of Inachus,  
 the place from where king Agamemnon once  
 set out with a thousand ships on his campaign  
 and sailed off over to the land of Troy.  
 He killed Priam, who ruled in Ilionk  
 and took the famous town of Dardanus. [^note-201]  
 Then he returned home, back here to Argos,  
 and set up in high temples piles of loot  
 from those barbarians. Yes, over there  
 things went well for him. But then he was killed in his own home, thanks to the treachery  
 of his wife, Clytaemnestra, at the hand                                                  
 of Thyestes’ son Aegisthus. So he died,  
 leaving behind Tantalus’ ancient sceptre. [^note-202]  
 Aegisthus rules this country now. He wed  
 Tyndareus’ daughter, the dead king’s wife.  
 As for those he left at home behind him  
 when he sailed to Troy, his son Orestes  
 and his daughter, too, Electra—well, now,  
 Aegisthus was about to kill Orestes, but an old servant of his father’s took him  
 and handed him to Strophius to bring up  
 in the land of Phocis. But Electra  
 stayed on in her father’s house. When she reached  
 her young maturity, the suitors came,                                                    
 the foremost ones throughout the land of Greece,  
 seeking marriage. Aegisthus was afraid  
 she’d bear a child to some important man,  
 who’d then seek revenge for Agamemnon.  
 So he wouldn’t give her to a bridegroom, but kept her in his home. Even this choice  
 filled him with fear, in case she’d give birth  
 to a noble child in secret. So he planned  
 to kill her. But though her heart is savage,  
 her mother saved her from Aegisthus’ hands.  
 She’d an excuse for murdering her husband,  
 but she feared that if she killed her children                                          
 she’d be totally disgraced. [^note-203] And that’s why  
 Aegisthus came up with the following scheme—  
 he offered gold to anyone who’d kill Agamemnon’s son, who’d left the country  
 as an exile, and he gave Electra  
 to me to be my wife. My ancestors  
 were from Mycenae, so in this matter  
 at least I don’t bear any of the blame.  
 My family was a good one but not rich,  
 and that destroys one’s noble ancestry.  
 He gave her to a man who had no power.  
 In that way his fear could be diminished.  
 If some important fellow married her,  
 he might have woken up the sleeping blood  
 of Agamemnon, and then at some point  
 justice would have come here for Aegisthus.  
 But I’ve never had sex with her in bed—  
 and Cypris knows I’m right in this—and so  
 Electra’s still a virgin. [^note-204]  
 I’d be ashamed  
 to take the daughter of a wealthy man  
 and violate the girl, when I’m not born  
 her equal. As for unfortunate Orestes,  
 who’s now, according to what people say, a relative of mine, I’m sorry for him,  
 if he should ever come back to Argos  
 and see his sister’s wretched marriage.  
 Any man who says I’m just an idiot                                                        
 to bring a young girl here into my home  
 and then not touch her should know he’s a fool,  
 measuring wisdom with a useless standard.  

[Electra enters from the hut. She is carrying a water jug]  

ELECTRA  
 O pitch black night, nurse of golden stars,  
 Through you I walk towards the river streams,  
 holding up this jar I carry on my head. This is not a task I am compelled to do,  
 but I will manifest to all the gods  
 Aegisthus’ insolence, and I will send  
 into this great sky my sorrowing cries  
 out to my father. For my own mother,                                             
 that murderous daughter of Tyndareus,  
 in her desire to please her husband,  
 has cast me from my home. With Aegisthus  
 she’s given birth to other children and thinks  
 Orestes and myself of no account inside her house.  

PEASANT  
 You unfortunate girl,  
 why do you work like this to give me help,  
 carrying out these chores? In earlier days,  
 you were nobly raised. Why don’t you stop,  
 especially when I mention this to you?  

ELECTRA  
 You’re kind to me, and I consider you  
 the equal of the gods in that. For now,  
 when I’m in trouble, you don’t demean me.  
 When human beings discover someone there  
 to soothe their miseries, as I have you,  
 then fate is doing something great for them.  
 So I should help you carry out the work  
 and give you some relief, to the extent  
 my strength permits, without you asking me,  
 so you can bear the load more easily.  
 There’s work enough for you to do outside.  
 I should take care of things within the house.  
 It’s nice when someone working out of doors  
 comes back in and finds things neat and tidy.  

PEASANT  
 Well, if you think you should do it, then go. The springs are no great distance from the house.  
 Once daylight comes, I’ll drive the oxen out,  
 go to the farmlands, and then sow the fields.  
 No matter how much his mouth talks of gods,                                
 a lazy man can never gather up  
 the stuff he needs to live without hard work.  

[Electra leaves for the spring, and the Peasant goes back to the house. Enter Orestes and Pylades, with two servants] 

ORESTES  
 Pylades, among men I think of you  
 as a loving host, foremost in my trust.  
 For you’re the only one of all my friends  
 who has dealt honourably with Orestes, as I’ve been coping with these dreadful things  
 I’ve had to put up with from Aegisthus,  
 who killed my father . . . he and my mother,  
 that destructive woman. I’ve come here,  
 from god’s mysterious shrine to Argive lands,  
 to avenge the killing of my father,  
 by murdering the ones who butchered him.  
 Last night I visited my father’s tomb.                                               
 where I wept and started sacrificing  
 by cutting off a lock of hair. And then, on the altar I made an offering of blood  
 from a sheep I slaughtered. But the tyrants  
 who control this land don’t know I’m here.  
 I’ve not set foot within the city walls.  
 No. I’ve come out to these border regions  
 for two reasons which act on me as one—  
 so I may run off to another land  
 if someone sees me and knows who I am  
 and to find my sister, who’s living here,  
 so they say, joined in marriage to a man, no virgin any more. I could meet her,                                              
 make her my accomplice in the murder,  
 and in this way get clear information  
 about what’s happening inside the walls.  
 But now that Dawn is raising her bright eyes,  
 let’s move aside to some place off the path.  
 We’ll see a ploughman or a servant woman,  
 then ask them if my sister lives near here.  
 In fact, I can see a household servant—  
 her shaven head holds up a water jug. [^note-205]  
 Let sit and ask this female slave some questions,                             
 Pylades—see if we can get some word  
 about the business which has brought us here.  

[Orestes and Pylades move back. Electra enters, on her way back from the spring. She does not see them at first.  
She starts to go through her ritual of mourning]  

ELECTRA  
 You must step quickly now—  
 it’s time to move—  
 keep going, lamenting as you go.  
 Alas for me! Yes, for me!  
 I am Agamemnon’s child.  
 I was born from Clytaemnestra,  
 Tyndareus’ detested daughter. Miserable Electra—that’s the name  
 the citizens have given me.  
 Alas, alas! My wretched work                                                           
 and this detested way of life!  
 O father, you now lie in Hades,  
 Agamemnon, thanks to that murder  
 committed by Aegisthus and your wife.  

 Come now, raise the same lament,  
 seize the joy of prolonged weeping.  

 You must step quickly now— it’s time to move—  
 keep going, lamenting as you go.  
 Alas for me! Yes, for me!  
 O my poor brother, in what town,                                                    
 in what household are you roaming,  
 abandoning your abject sister  
 to such painful circumstance  
 in her ancestral home? Come to me,  
 in my unhappy wretchedness.  
 Be my deliverer from pain— ah Zeus, Zeus—  
 be an avenger for my father,  
 the hateful shedding of his blood,  
 once the wanderer sets foot in Argos.  

 Take this water pitcher from my head                                              
 and set it down, so I may wail  
 my night laments, cries for my father,  
 wild shrieks, a song of death,  
 your death, my father. For you  
 beneath the earth, I cry out chants of sorrow—day after day  
 I keep up this constant grieving,  
 ripping my dear skin with my fingernails,  
 while my hand beats my shaven head—  
 all this because you’re dead.  

 Ah yes, mutilate your face,                                                               
 and, just as a swan sings out  
 beside the streaming river,  
 crying to its beloved father  
 who died ensnared within the web of a deceitful net, so I cry out  
 for you, unhappy father,  
 your body bathing in that final bath,  
 your most pitiable couch of death. [^note-206]  

 Ah me . . . ah me!  
 that bitter axe that hacked you,                                                       
 father, the bitter scheme  
 of your return from Troy!  
 Your wife failed to welcome you  
 with victor’s wreath and ribbons. No. Instead she gave you up  
 to that disgraceful mutilation  
 by Aegisthus’ two-edged sword  
 and got herself a treacherous mate.  

[Enter the Chorus of Argive women]  

CHORUS  
 O Electra, daughter of Agamemnon,  
 I’ve come here to your rural dwelling place.  
 A man’s arrived, a milk-drinking man—  
 he’s come here from Mycenae,                                                         
 a man who walks the mountains.  
 He says the Argives have proclaimed a sacrifice two days from now,  
 and every young bride has to go  
 to Hera’s shrine in the procession.  

ELECTRA  
 My sad heart is beating fast, my friends,  
 but not for festive ornaments  
 or necklaces made out of gold.  
 I won’t stand with the Argive girls  
 in choruses or beat my foot  
 as I whirl in the dance.                                                                      
 I pass my days in tears— in my unhappiness my care  
 day after day is with my tears.  
 See if this filthy hair and tattered clothes  
 suit Agamemnon’s royal child  
 or Troy, which bears the memory  
 of how my father seized the place.  

CHORUS  
 The goddess is great. So come,                                                         
 borrow thick woven clothes from me  
 and put them on, with gold as well,  
 graceful ornaments—to favour me. Do you think that with your tears  
 you can control your enemies  
 if you have no respect for gods?  
 My child, you’ll find yourself a gentler life  
 by honouring the gods with prayers,  
 and not with sorrowful laments.  

ELECTRA  
 No god is listening to the cries  
 of this ill-fated girl or to the murder  
 of my father all that time ago.                                                          
 Alas for that slaughtered man and for the wanderer still alive  
 dwelling somewhere in a foreign land,  
 a wretched vagabond at a slave’s hearth,  
 son of such a famous father.  
 And I am living in a peasant’s house,  
 wasting my soul up on the mountain tops  
 in exile from my father’s house.                                                        
 My mother, married to another man,  
 lives in a bed all stained with blood.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Your mother’s sister, Helen, brought the Greeks so many troubles and your house, as well. [^note-207]  

[Orestes and Pylades begin to move forward. Electra catches sight of them]  

ELECTRA  
 Alas, women, I’ll end my lamentation.  
 Some strangers hiding there beside the house,  
 at the altar, are rising up from ambush.  
 Let’s run off—escape these trouble makers.  
 You run along the path. I’ll go in the house.  

ORESTES  
 Stay here, poor girl. Don’t fear my hand.                                         

ELECTRA  
 O Phoebus Apollo, I beseech you—  
 don’t let me die!  

ORESTES  
 And let me cut down  
 others I hate much more than you.                                     

ELECTRA  
 Leave now! Don’t put your hands on those you should not touch.  

ORESTES  
 There’s no one I have more right to touch.  

ELECTRA  
 Then why wait beside my house in ambush,  
 with your sword drawn?  

ORESTES  
 Stay here and listen.  
 Soon you’ll be agreeing with me.  

ELECTRA  
 I’ll stand here.  
 I’m yours, anyway, since you’re the stronger.  

ORESTES  
 I’ve come to bring you news about your brother.  

ELECTRA  
 Dearest of friends—is he alive or dead?  

ORESTES  
 Alive. I’d like you to have good news first.                                       

ELECTRA  
 My you find happiness as your reward for those most welcome words.  

ORESTES  
 That’s a blessing  
 I’d like to give to both of us together.  

ELECTRA  
 My unhappy brother—in what country  
 does he live in wretched exile? 

ORESTES  
 He drifts around,  
 not settling for a single city’s customs.  

ELECTRA  
 He’s not lacking daily necessities?  

ORESTES  
 No, those he has. But a man in exile  
 is truly powerless.  

ELECTRA  
 What’s the message  
 you’ve come here to bring from him?  

ORESTES  
 I’m here  
 to see if you’re alive and, if you are, what your life is like.  

ELECTRA  
 Surely you can see,  
 first of all, how my body’s shrivelled?  

ORESTES  
 So worn with pain it makes me pity you.                                          

ELECTRA  
 And my hair cut off, shorn with a razor?  

ORESTES  
 Perhaps your dead father and your brother  
 are tearing at you.  

ELECTRA  
 Alas! Who is there  
 whom I love more than those two men?  

ORESTES  
 Ah yes, and what do you think you are  
 to your own brother?  

ELECTRA  
 He’s not here,  
 and so no present friend to me.  

ORESTES  
 Why live here, so distant from the city?  

ELECTRA  
 I’m married—  
 it’s a deadly state.  

ORESTES  
 I pity your brother.  
 Did you marry someone from Mycenae?  

ELECTRA  
 No one my father ever hoped to give me.  

ORESTES  
 Tell me. I’ll listen and inform your brother.                                     

ELECTRA  
 I live in his house, far from the city.  

ORESTES  
 This is a house fit for a ditch digger  
 or for a herdsman.  

ELECTRA  
 He’s poor but decent,  
 and he respects me.  

ORESTES  
 Your husband’s respect—  
 what does that mean?  

ELECTRA  
 Never once has he dared to fondle me in bed.  

ORESTES  
 Does he hold back  
 from some religious scruple, or does he think  
 you’re unworthy of him?  

ELECTRA  
 No. He believes  
 it’s not right to insult my ancestors.  

ORESTES  
 But how could he not be overjoyed  
 at making such a marriage?  

ELECTRA  
 Well, stranger,  
 he thinks the person who gave me away  
 had no right to do it.  

ORESTES  
 I understand.                                  
 He fears that someday he’ll be punished  
 by Orestes.  

ELECTRA  
 He is afraid of that, but he’s a virtuous man, as well.          

ORESTES  
 Ah yes,  
 you’ve been talking of a noble man  
 who must be treated well.  

ELECTRA  
 Yes, if the man  
 who’s far away from here right now comes back.  

ORESTES  
 And your mother, the one who bore you,  
 how did she take this?  

ELECTRA  
 Women give their love  
 to their husbands, stranger, not their children.  

ORESTES  
 Why did Aegisthus shame you in this way?  

ELECTRA  
 By giving me to such a man, he planned  
 the children I produced would not be strong.                         
ORESTES  
 Clearly so that you would not bear children  
 who could take revenge?  

ELECTRA  
 Yes, that’s his plan.  
 I hope he’ll have to make that up to me!  

ORESTES  
 You’re a virgin—does your mother’s husband know?                       

ELECTRA  
 No. We hide that from him with our silence.  

ORESTES  
 These women listening to what we’re saying  
 are friends of yours?  

ELECTRA  
 Yes. They’ll keep well concealed  
 my words and yours.  

ORESTES  
 If he came to Argos  
 what could Orestes do in all of this?  

ELECTRA  
 You have to ask? What a shameful question! Isn’t now a crucial time?  

ORESTES  
 When he comes,  
 how should he kill his father’s murderers?  

ELECTRA  
 By daring what my father’s enemies  
 dared to do to him.  

ORESTES  
 And would you dare  
 to help him kill your mother?  

ELECTRA  
 Yes, I would—  
 with the very axe that killed our father!  

ORESTES  
 Shall I tell him this? Are you quite certain?                                     

ELECTRA  
 Once I’ve shed my mother’s blood, let me die!  

ORESTES  
 Ah, if only Orestes were close by  
 and could hear this!  

ELECTRA  
 Stranger, if I saw him, I would not know him.  

ORESTES  
 That’s not surprising.  
 You were youngsters when you separated.  

ELECTRA  
 Only one of my friends would recognize him.  

ORESTES  
 The man who they say saved him from murder  
 by stealing him away?  

ELECTRA  
 Yes. An old man—  
 my father’s servant long ago.  

ORESTES  
 Your father—  
 when he died, did he get a burial tomb?  

ELECTRA  
 Once he’d been thrown out of the house,  
 he found what he could find.  

ORESTES  
 Alas! Those words of yours . . .                          
 Awareness even of a stranger’s pains gnaws away at mortal men. Tell me this—  
 once I know, I can carry to your brother  
 the joyless story which he has to hear.  
 Pity does not exist with ignorance,  
 only with those who know. Too much knowledge  
 is not without its dangers for wise men.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 My heart’s desires are the same as his.  
 Out here, far from the city, I don’t know  
 the troubles there. Now I want to hear them.  

ELECTRA  
 I will speak out, if that’s acceptable—  
 and it is appropriate to talk with friends  
 about the burden of my situation  
 and my father’s. And I beg you, stranger,  
 since you’ve the one who prompted me to speak,  
 tell Orestes of our troubles, mine and his.  
 First of all, there’s the sort of clothes I wear,  
 kept here in a stall, weighed down with filth.  
 Then there’s the style of house I’m living in,  
 now I’ve been thrown out of my royal home.  
 I have to work hard at the loom myself to make my clothes or else I’d have to go  
 with my body naked—just do without,  
 bringing water from the springs all by myself,  
 with no share in the ritual festivals,                                                  
 no place in the dance. Since I’m a virgin,  
 I keep married women at a distance  
 and felt shamed by Castor, who courted me,  
 his relative, before he joined the gods. [^note-208]  
 Meanwhile my mother sits there on her throne,  
 with loot from Phrygia and Asian slaves, my father’s plunder, standing by her chair,  
 their Trojan dresses pinned with golden brooches.  
 My father’s blood still stains the palace walls—  
 it’s rotted black—while the man who killed him  
 climbs in my father’s chariot and drives out,                                     
 proud to brandish in his blood-stained hands  
 the very sceptre which my father used  
 to rule the Greeks. Agamemnon’s grave  
 has not been honoured. It’s had no libations,  
 no myrtle branch, its altar unadorned. But this splendid husband of my mother,  
 so they say, when he’s soaking wet with drink,  
 jumps on the grave and starts pelting pebbles  
 at the stone memorial to my father,  
 and dares to cry out these words against us:
“Where’s your son Orestes? Is he present                                        
 to fight well for you and defend this tomb?”  
 And so absent Orestes is insulted.  
 But I beg you, stranger, take back this news.  
 Many are summoning him—I speak for them— my hands and tongue, my grief-stricken heart,  
 my shaven head, and Agamemnon, too.  
 It would be disgraceful if his father  
 could destroy the Phrygians and yet he,  
 one against one, could not destroy a man,  
 when he’s young and from a nobler father.  

[Enter the Peasant, returning from the fields]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Look! I see a man—I mean your husband—  
 he’s left his work. He’s coming to the house.                                   

PEASANT  
 Hold on. Who are these strangers I see there,  
 at the door? And why have they come here, to a farmer’s gate? What do they want from me?  
 It’s shameful for a woman to be standing  
 with young men.  

ELECTRA  
 My dear friend, don’t suspect me.  
 You’ll hear what’s going on. These strangers  
 have come here from Orestes—they’re messengers  
 with news for me. But forgive him, strangers,  
 for those words he said.  

PEASANT  
 What are they saying?  
 Is the man still gazing at the daylight?  

ELECTRA  
 That’s what they say, and I believe their news.                                

PEASANT  
 Does he still recall your father’s troubles and your own?  

ELECTRA  
 We can hope about those things,  
 but a man in exile has no power.  

PEASANT  
 What message from Orestes did they bring  
 when they came here?  

ELECTRA  
 He sent them out as spies  
 to look into my troubles.  

PEASANT  
 They’re seeing some,  
 and I suppose you’re telling them the rest.  

ELECTRA  
 They know—there’s no shortage of them.  

PEASANT  
 Surely we should have opened up our doors  
 long before this point. Go inside the house.  
 In exchange for your good news, you’ll find the hospitality my house affords.  
 You servants, take the stuff inside the house.                                  
 Do not refuse me—you are friends of ours  
 and you’ve come from someone who’s a friend.  
 Even if I’m poor, I will not behave  
 like someone with an ill-bred character.  

ORESTES  
 By the gods, is this the man pretending  
 you and he are married, who does not wish  
 to bring dishonour to Orestes?  

ELECTRA  
 He is—  
 he’s the one who in my miserable state they call my husband.  

ORESTES  
 Well, nothing is precise  
 when it comes to how a man is valued—  
 men’s natures are confusing. Before this,  
 I’ve seen a man worth nothing, yet he had                                      
 a noble father, and evil parents  
 with outstanding children. I’ve seen famine  
 in a rich man’s thinking and great spirit  
 in a poor man’s body. So how can we  
 sort out these things and judge correctly?  
 By riches? That would be a wretched test. By those who have nothing? But poverty  
 is a disease. Through need it teaches men  
 to act in evil ways. So should I turn  
 to warfare? But when facing hostile spears,  
 who can testify which men are virtuous?  
 Best to dismiss such things, leave them to chance.  
 This man is not great among the Argives,  
 nor puffed up by his family’s reputation.  
 He’s one of the crowd, yet has proved himself  
 an excellent man. So stop your foolishness, those of you who keep wandering around  
 full of misguided ways of measuring worth.  
 Why not judge how valuable men are  
 by their behaviour and their company?  
 Men like this one govern homes and cities well,  
 while those with muscles and with vacant minds  
 are mere decorations in the market place.  
 In fights with spears the strong arm holds its ground  
 no better than the weak one does—such things  
 depend on a man’s nature and his courage.  
 But because the man who is both absent  
 and yet present here is worthy of it—  
 I mean Agamemnon’s son, for whose sake  
 we’ve come here—let’s accept the lodging  
 in this home. You slaves, go inside the house.  
 May a poor but willing man be my host  
 rather than a man with wealth. I applaud  
 how this man has received me in his home,  
 although I could have hoped your brother,  
 enjoying prosperity, might lead me in to a successful house. Perhaps he’ll come.  
 The oracles of Loxias are strong.  
 But I dismiss mere human prophecy. [^note-209]  
  
[Pylades, Orestes, and their servants go into the house]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Now, Electra, our hearts are warm with joy—  
 more than they were before. Your fortunes  
 may perhaps advance, although that’s difficult,  
 and end up standing in a better place.  

ELECTRA  
 Reckless man, you know how poor your house is—  
 why did you offer your hospitality  
 to people so much greater than yourself?                                
PEASANT  
 What’s wrong? If they’re as well bred as they seem,  
 won’t they be just as happy with small men  
 as with the great?  

ELECTRA  
 Well, you’re one of the small—  
 and since you’ve now committed this mistake,  
 go to that dear old servant of my father’s.  
 He’s been expelled from town and tends his flocks  
 by the Tanaus river, which cuts a line                                              
 between lands of Argos and of Sparta.  
 Tell him this—now these people have arrived,  
 he must come and provide our guests some food. He’ll be happy to do that and offer 
 prayers up to the gods, after he finds out  
 the child he rescued once is still alive.  
 From my mother and my ancestral home  
 we’d get nothing—we’d bring them bitter news  
 if that cruel-hearted woman were to learn  
 Orestes is still living.  

PEASANT  
 All right then,  
 I’ll take that message to the old man,                                              
 if that’s what you think. But you should go  
 inside the house as soon as possible to get things ready there. If she want to,  
 surely a woman can find many things  
 to make into a meal. Within the house  
 there’s still enough to fill them up with food  
 for one day at least. It’s at times like this  
 when my thoughts can’t sort out how to manage,  
 I think of the great power money has  
 for giving things to strangers and paying  
 to save a body whenever it falls sick.  
 The food we need each day doesn’t come to much, and, rich or poor, all men eat their fill                                              
 with the same amount of food.  

[The Peasant and Electra move into the house, leaving the Chorus alone on stage]  

CHORUS  
 You famous ships which once sailed off to Troy  
 to the beat of countless oars,  
 leading the Nereids in their dance,  
 while the flute-loving dolphin leapt  
 and rolled around your dark-nosed prows,  
 conveying Achilles, Thetis’s son,  
 whose feet had such a nimble spring,  
 and Agamemnon, too, off to Troy,  
 to the river banks of the Simois. [^note-210]  

 Leaving Euboea’s headland points,  
 Nereids carried from Hephaestus’ forge 
 his labours on the golden shield and armour,  
 up to Pelion, along the wooded slopes  
 of sacred Ossa, where the nymphs keep watch,  
 and searched those maidens out,  
 in places the old horseman trained 
 sea-dwelling Thetis’ son                                                                    
 to be a shining light for Hellas, swift runner for the sons of Atreus. [^note-211]  

 I heard from a man who’d come from Troy  
 and reached the harbour in Nauplia  
 that on the circle of your splendid shield,  
 O son of Thetis, were these images,  
 a terror to the Phyrgians—  
 on the rim around the edge  
 was Perseus in his flying sandals                                                      
 holding up above the sea  
 the Gorgon’s head and severed throat, accompanied by Zeus’ messenger  
 Hermes, Maia’s country child. [^note-212]  

 In the centre of the shield 
 the circle of the sun shone out  
 with his team of winged horses.  
 In the heavens stars were dancing,  
 the Pleides and Hyades,  
 a dreadful sight for Hector’s eyes.  
 On his helmet made of hammered gold                                           
 in their talons sphinxes clutched their prey seduced by song.  
 And on the breastplate breathing fire  
 a lioness with claws raced at top speed  
 eying a young horse of Pirene. [^note-213]  

 And on his murderous sword 
 four horses galloped—above their backs  
 clouds of black dust billowed.  
 Evil-minded daughter of Tyndareus,                                                
 your bed mate killed the king  
 of spear-bearing warriors like these. And for that death the heavenly gods  
 will one day pay you back with death.  
 Yes, one day I will see your blood,  
 a lethal flow beneath your throat,  
 sliced through with sword of iron.  

[Enter the Old Man. Electra comes out of the house during his speech]  

OLD MAN  
 So where is she? Where is my young lady,  
 my mistress—the child of Agamemnon,  
 whom I once raised? How steep this path is  
 up to her place for a withered old man                                            
 going uphill on foot! Still, they are my friends, so I must drag my doubled-over spine  
 and tottering legs up here. O my daughter—  
 now I can see you there before the house—  
 I’ve come bringing here from my own livestock  
 this newborn lamb taken from its mother, 
 garlands, cheeses I got from the barrel,  
 and this ancient treasure from Dionysus—  
 it smells so rich! There’s not much of it, 
 but still it’s sweet to add a tankard of it  
 to a weaker drink. Go now. Let someone take these things for guests inside the house.                                 
 I want to use a rag, a piece of clothing,  
 to wipe my eyes. I’ve drenched them with weeping.  

ELECTRA  
 Why are your eyes so soaking wet, old man?  
 I’m not reminding you about our troubles  
 after all this time? Or are you moaning  
 about Orestes in his wretched exile  
 and about my father, whom you once held  
 in your arms and raised, though your friends and you  
 derived no benefits from it?  

OLD MAN  
 That’s right— it didn’t help us. But still, there’s one thing  
 I could not endure. So I went to his tomb,  
 a detour on the road. I was alone,                                                    
 so I fell down and wept, then opened up  
 the bag of wine I’m bringing for the guests,  
 poured a libation, and spread out there  
 some myrtle sprigs around the monument.  
 But then I saw an offering on the altar,  
 a black-fleeced sheep—there was blood as well,  
 shed not long before, and some sliced off curls, locks of yellow hair. My child, I wondered  
 what man would ever dare approach that tomb.  
 It surely wasn’t any man from Argos.  
 Perhaps you brother has come back somehow,  
 in secret, and as he came, paid tribute  
 to his father’s tomb. You should go inspect                                     
 the lock of hair, set it against your own—  
 see if the colour of the severed hair  
 matches yours. Those sharing common blood  
 from the same father will by nature have many features which are very similar.  

ELECTRA  
 What you’ve just said, old man, is not worth much.  
 You’ve no sense at all, if you think my brother,  
 a brave man, would sneak into this country  
 in secret, because he fears Aegisthus.  
 And how can two locks of hair look alike,  
 when one comes from a well-bred man and grew  
 in wrestling schools, whereas the other one  
 was shaped by woman’s combing? That’s useless.  
 Old man, with many people you could find  
 hair which looked alike, although by birth  
 they’re not the same.  

OLD MAN  
 Then stand in the footprint,  
 my child, and see if the impression there  
 is the same size as your foot.  

ELECTRA  
 How could a foot  
 make any imprint on such stony ground?  
 And even if it could, a brother’s print  
 would not match his sister’s foot in size.  
 The man’s is bigger.  

OLD MAN  
 If your brother’s come,  
 isn’t there a piece of weaving from your loom  
 by which you might know his identity? What about the weaving he was wrapped in  
 when I rescued him from death?                                                      

ELECTRA  
 Don’t you know  
 at the time Orestes left this country  
 I was still young? And if I’d made his clothes  
 when he was just a child, how could he have  
 the same ones now, unless the robes he wore  
 increased in size as his body grew? No.  
 Either some stranger, pitying the grave,  
 cut his hair, or someone slipped past the guard. [^note-214]  
  
OLD MAN  
 Where are your guests? I’d like to see them and ask about your brother.  

[Orestes and Pylades come out of the house]  

ELECTRA  
 Here they are—  
 coming outside in a hurry.  

OLD MAN  
 They’re well born,                                    
 but that may be misleading. Many men  
 of noble parentage are a bad lot.  
 But still I’ll say welcome to these strangers.  

ORESTES 
 Welcome to you, old man. So, Electra,  
 this ancient remnant of a man—to whom  
 among your friends does he belong?  

ELECTRA  
 Stranger,  
 this man is the one who raised my father.  

ORESTES  
 What are you saying? Is this the man who stole away your brother?  

ELECTRA  
 He’s the one  
 who rescued him, if he’s still alive.  

ORESTES  
 Wait!  
 Why’s he inspecting me, as if checking  
 some clear mark stamped on a piece of silver?  
 Is he comparing me with someone?  

ELECTRA  
 It could be he’s happy looking at you                                               
 as someone who’s a comrade of Orestes.  

ORESTES  
 Well, yes, Orestes is a friend of mine,  
 but why’s he going in circles round me?  

ELECTRA  
 Stranger, as I watch him, I’m surprised as well.                       
OLD MAN  
 O my daughter Electra, my lady—  
 pray to the gods.  

ELECTRA  
 What should I pray for,  
 something here or something far away?  

OLD MAN  
 To get yourself a treasure which you love,  
 something the god is making manifest.  

ELECTRA  
 Watch this then. I’m summoning the gods.  
 Is that what you mean, old man?  

OLD MAN  
 Now, my child,  
 look at this man, the one you love the most.  

ELECTRA  
 I’ve been observing for a long time now  
 to see if your mind is working as it should.                             
OLD MAN  
 I’m not thinking straight if I see your brother?  

ELECTRA  
 What are you talking about, old man,                                              
 making such an unexpected claim?  

OLD MAN  
 I’m looking at Orestes, Agamemnon’s son.  

ELECTRA  
 What mark do you see which will convince me?  

OLD MAN  
 A scar along his eyebrow. He fell one day  
 and drew blood. He was in his father’s house  
 chasing down a fawn with you.  

ELECTRA  
 What are you saying?  
 I do see the mark of that fall. . . . 

OLD MAN  
 Then why delay  
 embracing the one you love the most?                                    
ELECTRA  
 No. I’ll no longer hesitate—my heart  
 has been won over by that sign of yours.  

[Electra moves over to Orestes and they embrace]  

ELECTRA  
 You’ve appeared at last. I’m holding you . . . 
 beyond my hopes.  

ORESTES  
 After all this time,  
 I’m embracing you.  

ELECTRA  
 I never expected this.                                           

ORESTES  
 This was something I, too, could not hope for.  

ELECTRA  
 Are you really him?  

ORESTES  
 Yes. Your sole ally.  
 If in my net I can catch the prey I’m after . . . 
 But I’m confident. For if wrongful acts  
 overpower justice, then no longer should we put any faith in gods.  

CHORUS  
 You’ve come, ah, you’ve come,  
 this day we’ve waited for so long.  
 You’ve shone out and lit a beacon  
 for the city, the man who long ago  
 went out in exile from his father’s house  
 to roam around in misery.  
 Now a god, my friend, some god                                                      
 brings victory. Lift up your hands,  
 lift up your words, send prayers up to the gods for your success,  
 good fortune for your brother  
 as he goes in the city.  

ORESTES  
 Well, I’ve had the loving joys of welcome.  
 In time I’ll give them back to you again.  
 You, old man, you’ve come at a good time.  
 Tell me this—what should I do to repay  
 my father’s murderer and my mother,  
 his partner in this sacrilegious marriage?  
 Do I have any friends who’ll help in Argos?  
 Or are they all gone, just like my fortune?  
 Who can I make my ally? Do we meet  
 during the day or at night? What pathway  
 do I turn towards to fight my enemies?  

OLD MAN  
 My child, in your bad times you’ve got no friends.  
 It’s a great benefit to find someone  
 who’ll share with you the good times and the bad.  
 But since, as far as your friends can see,  
 you and the foundations of your house have been wiped out completely and you’ve left  
 no hope for them, then pay attention to me.  
 Know this—the only things which you possess                                
 to win back your father’s home and city  
 are your own hands and your good fortune.  

ORESTES  
 What then should I do to succeed in this?  

OLD MAN  
 Kill Thyestes’ son and your own mother. [^note-215]  

ORESTES  
 That’s the crown of victory I’m after.  
 But how do I get my hands on it?  

OLD MAN  
 Well, even if you want to try it, don’t go inside the walls.  

ORESTES  
 Is he well supplied  
 with garrison troops and bodyguards?  

OLD MAN  
 Yes, he is.  
 He’s afraid of you and does not sleep well.  

ORESTES  
 Well, old man, you must give me some advice  
 about what happens next.  

OLD MAN  
 Then listen to me. 
 A thought has just occurred to me.  

ORESTES  
 I hope you come up with something good                                       
 which I can understand.  

OLD MAN  
 While coming here,  
 I saw Aegisthus.  

ORESTES  
 I’ll accept those words.  
 Where was he? [^note-216]  

OLD MAN  
In the fields close to his stables.  

ORESTES  
 What was he doing? I can see some hope  
 emerging from our desperate circumstances.  

OLD MAN  
 He was setting up a banquet for the Nymphs—  
 that’s what it seemed to me.  

ORESTES  
 But was it for  
 a child that’s now being raised or some new birth? [^note-217]  

OLD MAN  
 I only know one thing—there was an ox.  
 He was preparing it for sacrifice.  

ORESTES  
 How many men did he have there with him?  
 Or was he by himself with his attendants?  

OLD MAN  
 No Argives, only a group of servants.                                       
ORESTES  
 Old man, there isn’t anybody there                                                  
 who’ll know me if he sees me, is there?  

OLD MAN  
 They’re slaves who have never set eyes on you.  

ORESTES  
 If we prevail, will they be on our side?  

OLD MAN  
 Yes. That’s what slaves are like. You’re lucky.  

ORESTES  
 How do I get close to him?  

OLD MAN  
 You should walk  
 where he can see you as he sacrifices.  

ORESTES  
 So apparently his fields are by the road?  

OLD MAN  
 Yes. When he catches sight of you from there,  
 he’ll summon you to join the feast.  

ORESTES  
 With god’s will, I’ll make a bitter fellow banqueter. 

OLD MAN  
 From there on you must sort things out yourself,  
 whatever happens.  

ORESTES  
 A shrewd observation.  
 What about my mother? Where is she?                                           

OLD MAN  
 In Argos. She’ll join her husband at the feast.  

ORESTES  
 Why did my mother not leave with her husband?  

OLD MAN  
 She stayed behind because she was afraid  
 the citizens would criticize her.  

ORESTES  
 I see.  
 She knows the city is suspicious of her.  

OLD MAN  
 That’s right. People hate a profane woman.  

ORESTES  
 How do I kill them both at the same time?  

ELECTRA  
 I’ll set up mother’s murder on my own.  

ORESTES  
 Good fortune will bring us success in this.  

ELECTRA  
 Let the old man give both of us some help.  

ORESTES 
 All right. But how will you devise a way                                           
 to kill our mother?  

ELECTRA  
 Old man, you must go  
 and report this news to Clytaemnestra—  
 say I have given birth, and to a son.  

OLD MAN  
 Born some time ago or quite recently?  

ELECTRA  
 Before my quarantine, ten days ago. [^note-218]  

OLD MAN  
 How does this advance your mother’s murder?  

ELECTRA  
 When she learns I’ve been through birthing pains,  
 she’ll come here.  

OLD MAN  
 Why would she do that? My child,  
 do you think she cares for you?  

ELECTRA  
 Yes. And she’ll weep  
 because my child is born so common.  

OLD MAN  
 Perhaps.  
 But come back to the point of what you’re saying.  

ELECTRA  
 If she comes, then clearly she’ll be killed.                                        

OLD MAN  
 Well, she’ll come to your house, right to the door.  

ELECTRA  
 So it won’t take much for her to turn aside  
 and go to Hades, will it?  

OLD MAN  
 Once I see that, then let me die!  

ELECTRA  
 But first of all, old man, 
 you must lead my brother . . . .  

OLD MAN  
 To where Aegisthus 
 is now offering gods his sacrifice.  

ELECTRA  
. . . then go to my mother. Tell her my news.  

OLD MAN  
 I’ll do it so the very words will seem 
 as if they came from your own mouth.  

ELECTRA [to Orestes]  
 Now it’s up to you. You’ve drawn first lot  
 in this murder sweepstakes.  

ORESTES  
 Then I’ll be off, 
 if someone will lead me to the road. 

OLD MAN  
 I’m quite willing to take you there myself.  

ORESTES  
 O Father Zeus, scatter my enemies . . . .  

ELECTRA  
 Pity us—we’ve suffered pitifully.  

OLD MAN  
 Yes, have pity on them, your descendants.  

ELECTRA  
 And Hera, who rules Mycenae’s altars . . . 

ORESTES  
 Give us victory, if what we seek is just.  

OLD MAN  
 Yes, give them justice to avenge their father.  

ORESTES  
 You, too, father, living beneath the earth  
 through an unholy slaughter.  

ELECTRA  
 And lady Earth,  
 whom I strike with my hands.  

OLD MAN  
 Defend these two.  
 Defend these children whom you love the most.                    
ORESTES  
 Come now, with all the dead as allies.  

ELECTRA  
 Those who in that war and by your side  
 destroyed the Phrygians.  

OLD MAN  
 And all those  
 who hate the sacrilegious and profane.  

ELECTRA  
 Are you listening, those of you who suffered  
 such terrors at the hand of my own mother?  

OLD MAN  
 Your father hears it all, I know. Time to go.  

ELECTRA [to Orestes]  
 He knows everything. You must be a man. [^note-219]  
 And I’ll tell you this—Aegisthus has to die.  
 If in the struggle with him you fall dead, then I die as well. Do not think of me  
 as still alive. I’ll take my two-edged sword  
 and slice into my heart. I’ll go inside  
 and get things ready. If you send good news  
 the whole house will ring with cries of triumph.  
 But if you die, things will be different.  
 These are my words to you.  

[Orestes, Pylades, the Old Man, and the attendants leave. Electra turns to face the Chorus]  

ELECTRA  
 And you women,  
 give a good shout to signal this encounter.  
 I’ll be ready waiting, gripping a sword.  
 If I’m defeated, I’ll never submit, surrendering to my enemies the right 
 to violate my body. 

[Electra goes back into the house]  

CHORUS  
 Among our ancient stories,  
 there remains a tale how Pan,  
 keeper of the country side,                                                               
 breathing sweet-toned music  
 on his harmonious flute,  
 once led a golden lamb  
 with the fairest fleece of all  
 from its tender mother in the hills of Argos.  
 Standing on the platform stone  
 a herald with a loud voice cried,  
“Assemble now, you Mycenaeans,  
 move into assembly, and see there  
 the terrifying and marvelous things  
 belonging to your blessed kings.”  
 So choruses gave out their tributes  
 to the House of Atreus.  

 Altars of hammered gold were dressed, while in the city fires blazed  
 with Argive sacrifice—a flute,  
 the Muses’ servant, piped graceful notes,  
 and seductive melodies arose  
 in honour of the golden lamb,  
 which now belonged to Thyestes.  
 He’d secretly talked into bed                                                            
 the well-loved wife of Atreus.  
 then carries home the marvellous prize,  
 and, going to the assembly, says he now possesses in his house  
 the horned sheep with its fleece of gold. [^note-220]  

 But then, at that very moment,  
 Zeus changed the paths  
 of all the shining stars,  
 the radiant glory of the sun,  
 and dawn’s bright shining face.                                                        
 Across the western reaches of the sky  
 he drove hot flames from heaven.  
 Rain clouds moved up to the north, so Ammon’s lands were dry—  
 all withered up, deprived by Zeus  
 of his most lovely showers of rain. [^note-221]  

 People speak about these tales,  
 but in such things my faith is small—  
 that the sun’s hot throne of gold                                                      
 turned round, to punish human beings,  
 in a cause involving mortal men.  
 But tales which terrify mankind  
 are profitable and serve the gods.  
 When you destroyed your husband  
 your mind was unconcerned with them,  
 you sister of such glorious brothers. [^note-222]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Wait! Hold on! Did you hear a shout, my friends?  
 Or has some vain notion overtaken me,  
 like Zeus’ rumbling underneath the ground?  
 Look, breezes are coming up—that’s a sign.  
 My lady, come out of the house! Electra!                                         

[Electra comes out of the house]  

ELECTRA  
 What is it, my friends? How are we faring  
 in the struggle? 

CHORUS LEADER  
 There’s only one thing I know— I heard the scream of murder. 

ELECTRA  
 I heard it, too.  
 It came from far away, but I could hear it.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Yes, a long way off, but it was clear.  

ELECTRA  
 Was it someone from Argos moaning,  
 or some of my friends?  

CHORUS LEADER  
 I’ve no idea.  
 People are shouting. Things are all confused.  

ELECTRA  
 What you say means my death. Why do I delay?  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Hold on until you clearly know your fate.  

ELECTRA  
 No. We’re beaten. Where are the messengers?  

CHORUS LEADER  
 They’ll be here. It’s no trivial matter  
 to assassinate a king.  

[Enter a Messenger on the run]  

MESSENGER  
 O you victorious daughters of Mycenae, 
 I can report to all Orestes’ friends  
 that he has triumphed, and now Aegisthus,  
 Agamemnon’s murderer, has fallen.  
 But we must offer prayers up to the gods.  

ELECTRA  
 Who are you? How can I trust what you’ve just said?  

MESSENGER  
 Don’t you know me on sight—your brother’s servant.  

ELECTRA  
 You best of friends! I was too full of fear  
 to recognize your face. But now I know you. What are you saying? Has that hateful man,  
 my father’s murderer, been killed?  

MESSENGER  
 He’s dead.                                  
 I’ve given you the same report twice now.  
 Obviously you like the sound of it.  

ELECTRA  
 O you gods, and all-seeing Justice,  
 you’ve come at last. How did Orestes kill  
 Thyestes’ son? What was the murder like?  
 I want to know.  

MESSENGER  
 After we’d left this house,  
 we walked along the two-tracked wagon path  
 to where Mycenae’s famous king might be. He happened to be walking in his garden,  
 a well-watered place, cutting soft myrtle shoots  
 to place in his own hair. When he saw us,  
 he called out,  
“Greetings, strangers. Who are you?                          
 Where are you from? What country is your home?”
 Orestes said, “We are from Thessaly,  
 on our way to the Alpheus river,  
 to offer sacrifice to Olympian Zeus.”  
 After hearing that, Aegisthus answered,  
“You must be my guests, share this feast with us. It so happens I’m now offering an ox,  
 sacrificing to the Nymphs. If you get up  
 out of bed at dawn, you’ll be no worse off.  
 So come, let’s go inside the house.”  
Saying this,  
 he grabbed our arms and led us off the road,  
 insisting that we must not turn him down.  
 Once we were inside the house, he said,                                          
“Let someone bring in water right away,  
 so these guests can stand around the altar  
 by the basin where they purify their hands.”  
But Orestes said, “We’ve just cleansed ourselves  
 in pure water from a flowing river.  
 If strangers must join with the citizens  
 in making sacrifice, then, Aegisthus,  
 we are ready and will not refuse, my lord.”  
 Those were the words they spoke in public.  
 The slaves guarding my master with their spears  
 set them aside, and they all lent a hand  
 to do the work, some bringing in the bowl                                        
 to catch the blood, others fetching baskets, still others kindling fire and setting basins  
 around the hearth. The whole house echoed.  
 Then your mother’s consort took barley grain,  
 sprinkled it across the altar, and said,  
“Nymphs of the rocks, may I and my wife,  
 Tyndareus’ daughter, in our home  
 offer frequent sacrifice, enjoying success,  
 as we do now, and may my enemies  
 do badly”—he meant you and Orestes.  
 My master prayed for quite the opposite, not saying the words aloud, so he might win  
 his ancestral home. Then from a basket                                           
 Aegisthus took a sacrificial knife,  
 sliced off some of the calf’s hair, and set it  
 with his right hand on the sacred fire.  
 His servants raised the calf onto their shoulders,  
 he cut its throat and spoke out to your brother,  
“People claim this about men from Thessaly—  
 they’re exceptional at butchering bulls  
 as well as taming horses. So, stranger, take this knife and demonstrate to us  
 if that report about Thessalians is true.”  
 Orestes gripped the well-made Dorian knife,               
 tossed from his shoulders his fine-looking cloak,                              
 and chose Pylades to help him in the work.  
 Pushing slaves aside, he took the calf’s hoof,  
 and, stretching out his arms, cut open  
 the beast’s white flesh and then stripped off the hide  
 faster than any runner could complete  
 two circuits on a track for racing horses. He opened up the flanks, and Aegisthus  
 picked up the sacred entrails in his hands  
 to have a look at them. But on the liver  
 the lobe was missing. There were signs of damage  
 which the man inspecting them could see 
 close to the gall bladder and the portal vein. 
 Aegisthus was upset. My master asked,                                           
“Why are you upset?” “Stranger,” he replied,  
“what I’m afraid of is foreign treachery.  
 Most of all I hate Agamemnon’s son, an enemy of my house.”  
My master said,  
“Do you really fear an exile’s trickery,  
 you, lord of the city? Let someone bring me,  
 a Phthian axe to replace this Doric knife  
 and let me split apart the breast bone,  
 so we can feast upon the inner organs.”  
 He took the axe and struck. Then Aegisthus  
 picked up and separated out the innards  
 and peered at them. As he was bending down,  
 your brother, standing on tip toe, hit him  
 on the spine and cut through his vertebrae.  
 His whole body went into convulsions,  
 shaking up and down, and he kept screaming,  
 he was dying in his own blood, a brutal death.  
 The servants saw and rushed to get their spears  
 for a fight of many men against just two.  
 But Pylades and Orestes stood there,  
 brandishing their weapons with great courage.  
 Then my master said,  
“I have not come here  
 as an enemy, not to the city or my servants, but to avenge myself  
 on the man who murdered my own father.  
 I am unfortunate Orestes. You men,                                                
 old servants of my father, don’t kill me.”  
 After the servants heard Orestes’ words,  
 they pulled back their spears. Then an old man  
 who’d been a long time in the household  
 recognized him. At once they placed a wreath  
 on your brother’s head, shouting and rejoicing,  
 and he’s coming here carrying a head to show it to you—not the Gorgon’s head,  
 but from the person you so hate, Aegisthus.  
 So the bitter debt of murderous bloodshed  
 is paid by the man who’s just been slaughtered.  

[The Messenger leaves]  

CHORUS  
 O my friend, set your feet to dancing,  
 leaping nimbly up to heaven with joy.                                              
 Your brother has emerged victorious  
 and now he’s won himself a crown,  
 in a competition surpassing those  
 which happen by Alpheus’ streams. [^note-223]  
 Come, as I perform my dance  
 sing out a song of glorious victory.  

ELECTRA  
 O light! O blazing chariot of the sun!  
 O earth and night whom I gazed at before!  
 I’ve freedom now to open up my eyes—  
 Aegisthus, the man who killed my father,  
 is fallen. Come, my friends, let’s bring out                                       
 whatever I keep stored up in the house  
 as decorations for my brother’s hair.  
 I’ll make a crown for his triumphant head.                              
CHORUS  
 Bring on your decorations for his head.  
 and we’ll keep up the dance the Muses love.  
 Now those dear kings we had before  
 will rule this land of ours with justice.  
 They’ve cast down those who broke our laws.  
 So let’s sing out in joyful harmony. 

[Orestes and Pylades enter with their attendants, who are carrying the body of Aegisthus]  

ELECTRA  
 O Orestes, you glorious conqueror,                                                  
 born from a father who was victorious  
 in the war at Troy. Take these ribbons  
 for your locks of hair. You’ve come back home, and your run around the stadium racetrack  
 has not been in vain. You’ve killed Aegisthus,  
 the man who killed our father, yours and mine,  
 our enemy. And you, who stood by him,  
 Pylades, reared by a pious father,  
 receive from my own hand this wreath. Your share  
 in this competition matched Orestes.  
 I hope I see you always prospering.  

ORESTES  
 First of all, Electra, you must believe                                                
 the gods were leaders in what’s happened here. Then praise me as a servant of the gods  
 and circumstance. I have returned back home  
 and killed Aegisthus, not in word but deed.  
 To underscore the truth of what I’ve said,  
 I’ve carried out the dead man’s corpse for you.  
 If it’s what you want, lay him out as prey  
 for wild beasts or impale him on a stake,  
 a prize for birds, those children of the sky.  
 In earlier days he was called your master,  
 and now he is your slave.  

ELECTRA  
 I feel ashamed,  
 but nonetheless I wish to speak.  

ORESTES  
 What is it?  
 Speak up. There’s nothing you need to fear.  

ELECTRA  
 To insult the dead—in case someone  
 might heap reproaches on me.  

ORESTES  
 But no one  
 would blame you in the slightest.  

ELECTRA  
 But the city  
 is hard to please and loves to criticize.  

ORESTES  
 Speak, sister, if you want to say something.  
 We are his enemies—there are no rules  
 in our relationship with him.  

ELECTRA [to the corpse of Aegisthus]  
 Well, then,  
 how shall I first begin to speak about the evil you have done? Where do I end?  
 What words shall I use for the central part?  
 It’s true that in the dawn I never stopped  
 rehearsing what I wished to say to you,  
 right to your face, if I were ever free  
 from my old fears. Well, now I am free.                                           
 So I will pay you back, abusing you  
 the way I wanted to when you were living.  
 You ruined me, taking away from me  
 and from this man here our dear father, although we hadn’t done you any wrong.  
 You made a shameful marriage with my mother,  
 then killed her husband, who was the general  
 who led the Greeks. You never went to Troy.  
 And you were so idiotic you believed  
 that with my mother you would get a wife  
 who was not evil, though she was betraying                                    
 my father’s bed. But you must know this—  
 when any man corrupts another’s wife,  
 having sex with her in secret, and then is compelled to take her as his wife,  
 such a man is foolish if he believes  
 that, though she was not virtuous before,  
 she will be now with him. You were living  
 an agonizing life, although it seemed  
 as if the way you lived was not so bad.  
 You knew well you’d made a profane marriage.  
 My mother realized she had in you  
 a sacrilegious man. You are both evil,  
 and so you both acquired each other’s traits. She shares your wickedness, and you share hers.  
 You heard these words from all the Argives—                                 
“That woman’s husband,” not “that man’s wife.”  
 And this is truly shameful—when the wife  
 controls the home rather than the husband.  
 I hate those offspring whom the city calls  
 children of their mother instead of saying  
 sons of their father. Still, when any man  
 makes a distinguished marriage well above  
 his station, no one talks of him, but only of his wife. But most of all,  
 you were so ignorant you were deceived  
 in claiming to be someone because your strength  
 was in your wealth. But that’s not worth a thing—                          
 its presence is short lived. What stays secure  
 is nature, not possessions. It stands there,  
 beside you, and takes away your troubles.  
 But when riches live with fools unjustly,  
 they bloom a little while, then flee the house.  
 As for your women, I will say nothing— it’s not good a virgin speak about such things.  
 But I’ll provide a hint, a simple riddle.  
 You were abusive, with your royal home,  
 your seductive looks. May I never have  
 a husband with the face of a young girl,  
 but one who has the look of a real man.  
 His children hold onto a life of war.                                                 
 The pretty ones are only ornaments  
 to decorate the dancing choruses. 
 So get out of here, and stay ignorant how you were found in time and punished.  
 And let no man committing wicked acts  
 believe that, if he runs the first lap well,  
 he is defeating justice, not before 
 he get to the finish, when he completes  
 the last turn in his life.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 What this man’s done  
 is dreadful, and he’s paid a dreadful price  
 to you and to Orestes. For Justice  
 has a power that’s enormous.  

ELECTRA  
 Well, you servants must take up the body  
 and hide it inside, somewhere in the dark,  
 so when my mother comes over here  
 she won’t see his corpse before she’s killed.  

[Pylades and the attendants take Aegisthus’ body into the house]  

ORESTES [looking off stage]  
 Wait a moment. Here’s another thing  
 we need to deal with.  

ELECTRA  
 What? Are those men I see  
 reinforcements coming from Mycenae?  

ORESTES  
 No. That’s the mother who gave birth to me.  

ELECTRA  
 She’s moving neatly right into our net.  
 How splendid she looks in that carriage,  
 such fine clothes.  

ORESTES  
 What are we going to do?  
 Kill our mother?  

ELECTRA  
 You’re not overcome with pity now you’ve seen our mother in the flesh?  

ORESTES  
 Ah, how can I kill her? She gave birth to me.  
 She raised me.  

ELECTRA  
 Just as she killed our father,                                         
 yours and mine.  

ORESTES  
 O Phoebus Apollo, 
 that prophecy of yours was so foolish. [^note-224]  

ELECTRA  
 Where Apollo is a fool, what men are wise?  

ORESTES  
 You instructed me to kill my mother,  
 but killing her is wrong.  

ELECTRA  
 On the other hand,  
 if you’re avenging your own father  
 how can you be harmed?  

ORESTES  
 I’ll be prosecuted for slaughtering my mother. Before now  
 I’ve been free of all impiety.  

ELECTRA  
 But if you don’t defend your father,  
 you’re a guilty man.  

ORESTES  
 But my mother?  
 If I kill her, how will I be punished?  

ELECTRA  
 What will happen to you if you give up  
 avenging your own father?  

ORESTES  
 Could it have been  
 a demon in the likeness of a god  
 who spoke?  

ELECTRA  
 Sitting on the sacred tripod?                                    
 I don’t think so.  

ORESTES  
 I cannot believe this prophecy was good.  

ELECTRA  
 You must be a man.  
 Don’t give way to cowardice. Set for her  
 the same trap you used to kill her husband,  
 when you destroyed Aegisthus.  

ORESTES  
 I’ll go in.  
 I’m about to launch a terrible act  
 and do dreadful things. Well, so be it,  
 if the gods approve of this. But to me  
 this contest is a bitter one, not sweet.  

[Orestes goes into the house. Clytaemnestra arrives in a chariot with attendants]  

CHORUS  
 Greetings lady, child of Tyndareus,  
 queen of this country of the Argives, sister of those noble twins,                                                               
 Zeus’ sons, who live in heaven  
 among the fiery constellations  
 and have the honourable task  
 of saving mortals in the roaring waves. [^note-225]  
 Welcome! I worship you 
 no less than I revere the gods  
 for your great wealth and happiness.  
 My queen, it’s now appropriate 
 that we attend to your good fortunes.                                     
CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 Get down from the carriage, women of Troy,  
 and take my hand, so I, too, may step down  
 out of this wagon. The houses of the gods                                       
 may be adorned with Phrygian trophies,  
 but I obtained these female slaves from Troy,  
 the finest in the land, as ornaments 
 within my household, small compensation  
 for the child I lost. [^note-226]  

ELECTRA  
Mother, is it all right  
 for me to take that blessed hand of yours,  
 given I live in this decrepit house, just like a slave, now I’ve been cast out  
 of my ancestral home?  

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 The slaves are here.  
 Don’t exert yourself on my behalf.  

ELECTRA  
 Why not? After all, I’m a captive, too,  
 you sent away from home. Like these women,  
 I was taken when my house was seized                                           
 and left without a father.  

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 Well, your father  
 brought that about with plots against the ones  
 he should have loved the most, his own family.  
 I’ll describe it to you, though when a woman gets an evil name, her tongue grows bitter,  
 and that, it seems to me, is no bad thing.  
 But you should learn the facts of what’s gone on  
 and then despise it, if it’s worth your hate.  
 If not, why hate at all? Tyndareus  
 gave me to your father, not intending  
 that I or any children I might bear  
 should die. But that man, when he left his home,                           
 convinced my daughter to accompany him,  
 by promising a marriage with Achilles, and took her to the anchored fleet at Aulis. [^note-227]  
 There he had Iphigeneia stretched out  
 and slit her pale white throat above the fire.  
 If he’d killed one girl for the sake of many,  
 to protect the city from being taken,  
 or to help his house or save his family,  
 I’d have pardoned him. But he killed my child  
 because of Helen’s lust, because the man  
 who’d taken her as wife had no idea  
 how to keep his treacherous mate controlled. For all of that, although I had been wronged,                                  
 I’d not have grown enraged or killed my husband.  
 But he came back to me with some mad girl—  
 possessed by gods—and put her in his bed, 
 so he could have two brides in the same house. [^note-228]  
 Women are foolish. I’ll concede the point.  
 But given that, when a husband goes astray,  
 rejecting his domestic bed, his wife  
 may well wish to follow his example  
 and find another man to love. And then the blame makes us notorious—the men  
 who caused it all are never criticized.                                               
 If someone had carried Menelaus  
 away from home in secret, should I then  
 have killed Orestes to save Menelaus,  
 my sister’s husband? How would your father      
 have put up with that? So is it not right  
 for him to die? He slaughtered my own child.  
 I would’ve kept on suffering at his hands.  
 I killed him. The road lay open to me, and so I turned towards his enemies.  
 After all, which one of your father’s friends  
 would have joined me to commit the murder?  
 Speak up, if you wish, and answer frankly.  
 In what way was your father’s death unjust?                                   

CHORUS LEADER  
 There’s justice in your words, but that justice  
 is disgraceful. If she has any sense,  
 a woman should give way in everything  
 to her own husband. Those who disagree  
 I don’t take into account in things I say.                                 
ELECTRA  
 Bear in mind, mother, the last thing you said,  
 offering me a chance to be frank with you.  

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 Yes, my child. And I won’t take that back.  
 I’ll repeat it now.  

ELECTRA  
 You’ll hear me out, mother,  
 and won’t punish me?  

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 No, I won’t,  
 not if I’m giving pleasure to your heart.  

ELECTRA  
 Then I’ll speak, starting with an opening comment.                        
 O mother, I do wish you had more sense.  
 Your beauty brings you praise that’s well deserved—  
 the same is true for Helen—but you two were born twin sisters, both very silly,  
 quite unworthy of your brother Castor.  
 She was willing to be carried off and ruined,  
 and you destroyed the finest man in Greece,  
 using the excuse you killed your husband  
 for your child, since people do not know you  
 the way I do. But before it was decided      
 that your daughter would be sacrificed,                                           
 no sooner had your husband left his home,  
 than you were fixing your fine locks of hair seated at your mirror, and any wife  
 who primps her beauty when her husband’s gone,  
 you can scratch her off the list as worthless.  
 There’s no call for her to show her pretty face  
 outside the home, unless she’s seeking mischief.  
 Of all the women in Greece, I believe  
 you were the only one who was happy  
 whenever Trojan fortunes were successful  
 and whose eyes would frown when they got worse,  
 because it was your hope that Agamemnon would not get back from Troy. But nonetheless,  
 you could have stayed a truly virtuous woman.                               
 The husband you had was in no way worse  
 than that Aegisthus, and he’d been chosen  
 by the Greeks themselves to lead the army.  
 When your sister Helen did what she did,  
 you had an opportunity to gain  
 great glory for yourself, since bad conduct  
 sets a standard for our noble actions  
 and makes them something everyone can see. But if, as you are claiming, our father  
 killed your daughter, how have you been wronged  
 by me and by my brother? Why is it,  
 once you’d killed your husband, you didn’t give  
 our father’s home to us, but filled your bed  
 with someone else’s goods and for a price                                       
 bought yourself a marriage? And why is it  
 this husband has not been made an exile  
 for banishing your son? Why is he not dead  
 instead of me? The way I’m living now has killed me twice as often as my sister.  
 If justice says that murder pays for murder,  
 your son Orestes and myself must kill you  
 to avenge our father. If your act was just,  
 then this one must be, too. Any man  
 watching out for wealth and noble birth  
 who gets married to a vicious woman  
 is a fool. A virtuous, humble marriage  
 is better for the home than something grand.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Marrying women is a matter of chance.  
 Some, I notice, work out well, others badly. [^note-229]  

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 My child, it was always in your nature  
 to love your father. That’s how thing turn out.  
 Some are their fathers’ children, while others  
 love their mothers rather than their fathers.  
 I’ll forgive you. I don’t get much delight,  
 my child, from what I’ve done. But why are you  
 so filthy, your body dressed in such poor clothes?  
 You’ve just been confined and given birth. [^note-230]  
 Alas, my schemes have made me miserable! I urged my anger on against my husband                                        
 more than I should have.  

ELECTRA  
 Well, it’s too late now  
 to moan about it. There’s no remedy.  
 My father’s dead. But why don’t you bring back  
 that exile from this land, your wandering son?  

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 I’m too afraid. I’m looking after me,  
 not him. And he’s angry, so people say,  
 about the murder of his father.  

ELECTRA  
 Why let your husband be so cruel to me?  

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 That’s how he is. You’ve a stubborn nature.                            
ELECTRA  
 Because I’m suffering. But I’ll stop being angry.  

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 Then he’ll no longer behave harshly to you.  

ELECTRA  
 He’s got ideas of grandeur, living there                                            
 inside my home. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 You see? Once again  
 you’re kindling a new quarrel. 

ELECTRA  
 I’ll be silent,  
 my fear of him being what it is.  

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 Stop this talk.  
 Why have you sent for me, my child?  

ELECTRA  
 You’ve heard, I think, that I have given birth.  
 Please offer up a sacrifice for me—  
 I don’t know how to do that—on the tenth day, as is our custom with an infant child.  
 I’ve had no children before this, and so  
 I lack experience.  

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 That task belongs  
 to the person who delivered the child.  

ELECTRA  
 I was by myself in labour, so I bore  
 the child all on my own.  

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 Is this house here  
 so remote there are no friendly neighbours?                                     

ELECTRA  
 No one wants poor people as their friends.  

CLYTAEMNESTRA  
 Well, I’ll go and make the gods a sacrifice  
 for the full term of the child. When I’m done carrying out this favour for you, I’ll leave,  
 off to the field where my husband’s offering  
 sacrifices to the Nymphs. You servants,  
 take this team away. Put them in the pens.  
 When you think I’ve finished sacrificing  
 to the gods, stand ready. I must satisfy  
 my husband’s wishes, too.  

ELECTRA  
 Enter this poor home.  
 For my sake take care the soot-stained walls                                   
 don’t stain your clothes. You’ll give the gods  
 the sacrifice you ought to make.  

[Clytaemnestra goes into the house]  

 And now the basket’s ready and the knife is keen,  
 the one which killed the bull you’ll lie beside  
 when you’re struck down. In Hades’ home  
 you’ll be wedded to the man you slept with  
 while you were alive. I’ll be offering you  
 this favour, and you’ll be giving me  
 retribution for my father.  

[Electra goes into the house]  

CHORUS  
 Evils are repaid. Winds of fortune  
 for this house are veering round.  
 Back then my leader, my very own, fell murdered in his bath.  
 Roof and stone walls of the house                                                    
 resounded, echoing his cries—  
“You vicious woman, why kill me  
 now I’ve come to my dear land  
 after ten harvest seasons?” [^note-231]  

 The flow of justice has reversed itself  
 and brings to judgment for adultery  
 the killer of her unhappy husband  
 when he finally returned back home, to the towering Cyclopean walls.  
 With her own hand she murdered him,  
 the sharpened edge of a keen axe  
 gripped in her fists. Poor sad husband!  
 What evils overtook this wretched woman?                                      
 She did it like a mountain lion  
 prowling through a wooded meadow.  

CLYTAEMNESTRA [from inside the house]  
 By the gods, children, don’t kill your mother.  

CHORUS  
 Do you hear that cry from inside the house?  

CLYTAEMNESTRA [screaming from inside]  
 Ah . . . my god . . . ah . . . not me . . .                                      
CHORUS  
 I moan, too, as her children beat her down.  
 The god indeed dispenses justice,  
 whenever it may come.  
 You’ve suffered horribly, sad lady,                                                    
 but you carried out unholy acts  
 against your husband.  

[Orestes, Pylades, and Electra and Attendants emerge slowly from the house with the bodies of 
Aegisthus and Clytaemnestra]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 But here they come, moving from the house,  
 stained with fresh-spilt blood from their own mother,  
 a trophy, proof of their harsh sacrifice.  
 There is no house, not now or in the past, more pitiable than the race of Tantalus.  

ORESTES  
 O Earth and Zeus, who sees all mortal men,  
 look on these abominable and bloody acts,  
 these two corpses lying on the ground                                             
 struck down by my hand, repayment  
 for everything I’ve suffered.  

ELECTRA  
 Too much cause to weep, my brother,  
 and I have made this happen.  
 In my wretchedness my fiery rage  
 burned on against my mother who gave birth to me, her daughter.  

CHORUS  
 Alas for fortune, for your fortune,  
 a mother who has given birth  
 to pain beyond enduring,  
 bearing wretched misery and more  
 from your own children, and yet it’s just—  
 you’ve paid for murdering their father.                                            

ORESTES  
 Alas, Phoebus, that justice you sang of  
 had an obscure tone, but the pain you caused  
 was clear enough—you’ve given me an exile’s fate, far from these Greek lands.  
 To what other city can I go?  
 What host, what man with reverence  
 will look at me, who killed my mother?  

ELECTRA  
 Alas, alas for me! Where do I go?  
 To what wedding or what choral dance?  
 What husband will take me to a bridal bed?                                    

CHORUS  
 Your spirit is shifting back once more  
 changing with the breeze. Your thoughts 
 are pious now, although profane before. You’ve done dreadful things, my friend,  
 to your own reluctant brother.  

ORESTES  
 Did you see that desperate woman,  
 how she threw her robe aside  
 and bared her breasts for slaughter?  
 Alas for me! The limbs which gave me birth  
 collapsing down onto the ground.  
 And her hair, I . . . 

CHORUS  
 I understand.                                               
 You had to go through torments,  
 hearing your mother’s screaming, the one who bore you. 

ORESTES  
 She stretched her hand toward my chin  
 and cried, “My son, I beg you.”  
 She clung onto my cheeks—  
 the sword dropped from my hands.  

CHORUS  
 Poor lady! How could you dare  
 to watch your murdered mother  
 breathe her last before your eyes.                                                     

ORESTES  
 I threw my cloak over my eyes,  
 then sacrificed her with the sword. I shoved it in my mother’s neck.  

ELECTRA  
 I was encouraging you—  
 my hand was on the sword, as well.  

CHORUS  
 You have inflicted suffering  
 of the most dreadful kind.  

ORESTES  
 Take this robe, hide our mother’s limbs.  
 Close up her wounds. You gave birth  
 to your own murderers.  

ELECTRA [covering Clytaemnestra’s corpse]  
 There, with this cloak I’m covering up                                             
 one who was loved and yet not loved.                                     
CHORUS  
 A end of the great troubles for this house.  

[Castor and Polydeuces, the Dioscouri, appear above the building on the stage]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 But there above the roof beams of the house  
 something’s coming. Spirits or gods from heaven?  
 That path does not belong to mortal men.  
 Why are they coming into human view?  

DIOSCOURI: [from the top of the house] [^note-232]  
 Son of Agamemnon, you must listen.  
 The twin sons of Zeus are calling you,  
 Castor and his brother Polydeuces,                                                  
 your mother’s brothers. We’ve just reached Argos,  
 after calming down a roaring storm at sea, a dreadful threat to ships, after we had seen  
 the murder of our sister and your mother.  
 She’s had justice, but you’ve not acted justly.  
 As for Phoebus, Phoebus, I’ll say nothing.  
 He is my master. Although he’s wise,  
 the prophecy he made to you was not.  
 You must accept these things and later on  
 act on what Fate and Zeus have set for you.  
 Give Electra to Pylades as his wife,  
 to take back home. And you must leave Argos.  
 It’s not right for you, who killed your mother,  
 to set foot in the city. The Keres,  
 those fearful dog-faced goddesses of death,  
 will hound you everywhere, a wanderer  
 in a mad fit. [^note-233] You must go to Athens  
 and embrace Athena’s sacred image.  
 She’ll guard you from their dreadful writhing snakes  
 and stop them touching you, by holding out  
 her shield with the Gorgon’s face above your head.  
 And there’s the hill of Ares, where the gods first sat down to cast their votes on bloodshed,  
 when savage Ares slaughtered Halirrothius,                                    
 son of the god who rules the sea, enraged  
 at the unholy raping of his daughter. [^note-234]  
 That place is where decisions made by vote  
 are most secure and sacred to the gods.  
 Here you must go on trial for murder.  
 The process will result in equal votes  
 so you’ll be saved from death, for Apollo  
 will take responsibility himself. His oracle advised your mother’s murder.  
 This law will be established from then on—  
 those accused will always be acquitted  
 with equal votes. Struck by the pain of this,                                      
 those fearful goddesses will then sink down 
 into a chasm right beside the hill,  
 a reverent and holy shrine for men.  
 You must settle an Arcadian city  
 by Alpheus’ streams, near the sacred shrine  
 of Lycaean Apollo, and that city will get its name from you. I’ll tell you more.  
 As for Aegisthus’ corpse, the citizens  
 in Argos here will place it in a grave.  
 But in your mother’s case, Menelaus,  
 who’s just arrived at Nauplia, so long  
 after he seized the territory of Troy,  
 will bury her, with Helen’s help. She’s come  
 from Proteus’ home, leaving Egypt.  
 She never went to Troy. It was Zeus’ wish  
 to stir up war and bloodshed among men. So he sent Helen’s image off to Troy. [^note-235]  
 Since Pylades now has got a virgin wife,  
 let him go home and leave Achaean land,  
 with the man they call your brother-in-law  
 to the land of Phocis. He must give him  
 a great weight of riches. But as for you,  
 you must leave along the narrow Isthmus  
 and go to the blessed hill of Cecrops. [^note-236]  
 Once you’re completed your appointed fate                                    
 for doing the murder, you’ll find happiness and be released from troubles.  

CHORUS  
 O sons of Zeus, are we permitted  
 to come near and speak to you.  

DIOSCOURI  
 That is allowed—you’re not defiled  
 by this murder here.  

ELECTRA  
 And me, sons of Tyndareus,  
 may I join in what’s said?  

DIOSCOURI  
 You may. It’s to Apollo  
 I ascribe this bloody act.  

CHORUS  
 How is that you two gods, brothers of this murdered woman,  
 did not keep death’s goddesses                                                        
 far from her home?  

DIOSCOURI  
 Destiny and Fate brought what must be—  
 and Apollo’s unwise utterance.  

ELECTRA  
 What Apollo and what prophecies  
 ordained that I must be 
 my mother’s murderer?  

DIOSCOURI  
 You worked together  
 and shared a single fate. One ancestral curse  
 has crushed you both.  

ORESTES  
 After such a lengthy time  
 I’ve seen you, my sister,  
 and immediately must lose                                                               
 your love, abandoning you,  
 as you abandon me.  

DIOSCOURI  
 She has a home and husband,  
 and will not suffer piteously,  
 except she leaves the Argives’ city.                                           
ELECTRA  
 What else brings one more grief  
 than moving out beyond the limits  
 of one’s native land?  

ORESTES  
 But I’ll go from my father’s house,  
 then undergo a trial by strangers  
 for murdering my mother.  

DIOSCOURI  
 Be brave. You’ll reach  
 Athena’s sacred city.                                                                         
 Just keep enduring all.  

ELECTRA  
 Hold me, my dearest brother, your breast against my breast.  
 The curses of a slaughtered mother  
 divide us from our father’s home.  

ORESTES  
 Throw your arms around me.  
 Give me a close embrace.  
 Then mourn for me as if I’d died,  
 and you were at my burial mound.  

DIOSCOURI  
 Alas, alas! You’ve said things  
 dreadful even for the gods to hear.  
 I and those in heaven have pity  
 for mortals who endure so much. 

ORESTES  
 I’ll not see you anymore.  

ELECTRA  
 I’ll not come into your sight.  

ORESTES  
 These are the final words  
 I’ll ever say to you.  

ELECTRA  
 Farewell, my city! A long farewell  
 to you my fellow countrywomen!  

ORESTES  
 Are you going already,  
 my most faithful sister?  

ELECTRA  
 Yes, I’m leaving now my soft eyes wet with tears.  

ORESTES  
 Farewell, Pylades. Be happy.                                                            
 Go and get married to Electra  

DIOSCOURI  
 The marriage will be their concern.  
 You leave for Athens to escape these hounds,  
 with their dark skins and hands made up of snakes.  
 They’re on a dreadful hunt to chase you down  
 and bring you harvests of horrific pain.  
 We two are off to the Sicilian sea.  
 We’ll hurry there to rescue ships at sea. As we pass through the flat expanse of air,  
 we bring no help to those who’ve been defiled.                               
 We do protect the men who way of their life  
 reveres what’s just and holy, releasing them  
 from overbearing hardships. Let no one  
 wish to act unjustly or to get on board  
 with men who break their oaths. It’s as a god  
 that I address these words to mortal men.  

[Castor and Polydeuces disappear. Orestes leaves the stage. Electra and Pylades move off in a different direction. The attendants go with them]  

CHORUS  
 Farewell. Any mortal who can indeed fare well  
 without being ground down by misfortune, that man will find his happiness.  

[The Chorus carries the bodies back into the house]  
  
  

[^note-201]: *. . . Dardanus*: Ilion is an alternative name for Troy, and Dardanusis the name of a famous ancestor of Priam, king of Troy. Hence, the Trojans were often called Dardanians. 

[^note-202]: *. . . ancient sceptre*: Tantalus was the legendary founder of the royal family of Argos, called the Pelopids after Tantalus’ sonPelops. Tantalus was Agamemnon’s and Menelaus’ great-great-grandfather. 

[^note-203]: *. . . totally disgraced*: Clytaemnestra’s excuse for killing Agamemnon is, of course, the fact that he sacrificed their daughter Iphigeneia in order to enable the fleet to sail to Troy. 

[^note-204]: *. . . still a virgin*: Cypris is a common name for Aphrodite, the goddess of sexual love. The name comes from the goddess’ frequent association with Cyprus. 

[^note-205]: *. . . a water jug*: the shaven head may be a token of mourning or a sign of Electra’s low status now or both. 

[^note-206]: *. . . couch of death*: Agamemnon was killed in his bath, trapped under his cloak, as if under a hunting net. 

[^note-207]: *. . . your house, as well*: Helen and Clytaemnestra were twin sisters born to Leda, but with different fathers—Tyndareus, king of Sparta and Leda’s husband, was Clytaemnestra’s father, but Zeus, who in the form of a swan raped Leda, was Helen’s. 

[^note-208]: *. . . Castor*: Castor and Polydeuces (also called Pollux), theDioscuri, were twin brothers of Helen and Clytaemnestra, all born at the same time to Leda, queen of Sparta (hence Castor is an uncle of Electra). Polydeuces and Helen were children of Zeus, while Castor and Clytaemnestra were children of Tyndareus. When Castor was killed (before the Trojan war), Polydeuces turned down immortality, but Zeus allowed them to alternate, living among the gods and men, changing each day. 

[^note-209]: *. . . oracles of Loxias*: Loxias is another name for Apollo, the god whose shrine Orestes consults before coming to Argos (as he mentions at line 115 above). But we do not know the text of the oracle (although we later learn it encouraged him to commit the revenge murders), and Electra is, one assumes, ignorant of Orestes’ visit to the shrine. 

[^note-210]: *. . . Nereids*: These are sea goddesses, daughters of Nereus. Achilles’ mother, Thetis, was one of them. 

[^note-211]: *. . . sons of Atreus*: These lines refer to the centaur Chiron (or Cheiron), half man and half horse, who in the region described, educated Achilles and other heroes. Pelion and Ossa are two famous mountains. Hephaestus is the god who made Achilles’ divine armour (at the request of Achilles’ mother, the goddess Thetis) after his own armour worn by Patroclus had been captured by Hector, the leader of the Trojan forces. 

[^note-212]: *. . . Maia’s country child*: Perseus was the hero who killed Medusa, the most ferocious of the Gorgons (her face turned men to stone). Hermes, divine son of Zeus, assisted Perseus in the exploit. He is called a “country child” because he is associated with farming and hunting. 

[^note-213]: *. . . racing lioness*: This is a reference to the monster Chimaera, a fire-breathing lioness with a goat’s body and head growing out of its back. The Chimaera was killed by the hero Bellerophon. The reference to Hector is a reminder that he had to face Achilles’ shield in his final and fatal encounter with Achilles (described in Book 22 of the Iliad). 

[^note-214]: *. . . slipped past the guard*: This line is corrupt and makes little sense in the Greek. The words “someone slipped past the guard” have been put in to make sense of Electra’s words, turning the line into a suggestion that some citizen may have eluded Aegisthus’ sentries and paid a tribute to Agamemnon. As Cropp points out, omitting the line makes it read as if the Old Man is interrupting Electra, a dramatically implausible action. 

[^note-215]: *. . . Thyestes’ son*: Aegisthus is the son of Thyestes (brother of Agamemnon’s father, Atreus). Atreus and Thyestes quarreled, and Atreus killed Thyestes’ sons and served to him at dinner. Aegisthus survived the slaughter or (in other accounts) was born after the notorious banquet. Euripides’ play makes no direct mention of this important part of the traditional story. 

[^note-216]: *. . . I’ll accept those words*: Cropp suggests that Orestes’ rather odd phraseology in this speech and the previous one stems from the fact that he is using the language of ritual, as if he were consulting an oracle, first hoping that he gets a good pronouncement which he can understand and then accepting the “utterance.” 

[^note-217]: *. . . some new birth*: the Nymphs, minor country goddesses, were associated with physical health, including childbirth and childhood. 

[^note-218]: *. . . ten days ago*: the “quarantine,” Cropp notes, was a period immediately after childbirth in which the mother was kept in seclusion to avoid contamination. 

[^note-219]: *. . . be a man*: There is some confusion and argument about the allocation and position of this line, which in the Greek comes after this speech of Electra’s and is divided between Orestes and Electra. I have followed Cropp’s suggestion and given the entire line to Electra at the beginning of her speech to Orestes. 

[^note-220]: *. . . fleece of gold*: Thyestes and Atreus were brothers who quarreled. Thyestes seduced Atreus’ wife, Aerope, and, in revenge, Atreus killed Thyestes’ sons and served them up to him for dinner. Aegisthus is Thyestes’ surviving son. The golden lamb in question seems to be the symbol of the right to rule in Mycenae. 

[^note-221]: *. . . Ammon’s land*: This is a reference to North Africa, where Ammon’s shrine was located. 

[^note-222]: *. . . glorious brothers*: Clytaemnestra’s brothers are Castor and Polydeuces, or Pollux, the Dioscuri, twin brothers of Helen and Clytaemnestra, all born at the same time to Leda, queen of Sparta (hence Castor is an uncle of Electra). Polydeuces and Helen were children of Zeus, while Castor and Clytaemnestra were children ofTyndareus. When Castor was killed (before the Trojan war),Polydeuces turned down immortality, but Zeus allowed them to alternate, living among the gods and men, changing each day. 

[^note-223]: *. . . Alpheus*: Cropp suggests that this is a reference to the Olympic games. 

[^note-224]: Phoebus is a common name for Apollo, the god whose oracle Orestes consulted before coming to Argos. The god advised him to carry out the revenge murders. 

[^note-225]: *. . . noble twins*: This is another reference to Castor andPolydeuces (or Pollux) twin brothers of Clytaemnestra. Strictly speaking only one of them was a child of Zeus (as was Helen,Clytaemnestra’s sister). Clytaemnestra and Castor were children ofTyndareus. The twins occupied a position among the stars (we call them the Gemini), and hence were an aid to navigation. 

[^note-226]: *. . . the child I lost*: This is a reference to Clytaemnestra’s daughter Iphigeneia, whom Agamemnon sacrificed at the start of the Trojan expedition in order to persuade the gods to change the winds so that the fleet could sail. Clytaemnestra gives details of the story in her next long speech. 

[^note-227]: *. . . Aulis*: This was the agreed meeting point for the great naval expedition to Troy. Bad winds delayed the fleet for so long that the entire enterprise was jeopardized. The gods demanded a sacrifice from Agamemnon. 

[^note-228]: *. . . in the same house*: The young girl was Cassandra, daughter of Priam, king of Troy, given as a war prize to Agamemnon. She was a prophetess under a divine curse: she always spoke the truth, but no one ever believed her. She is an important character in Aeschylus’ treatment of this story in his play Agamemnon. 

[^note-229]: *. . . others badly*: These lines of pithy moralizing at the end of Electra’s speech and in this speech by the Chorus Leader sound very out of place here. Some editors have removed them as a later addition to the text. 

[^note-230]: *. . . given birth*: Some editors find these two and half lines a very odd change of subject for Clytaemnestra, who is now dwelling on her own sorrow. Cropp moves them to the opening of Clytaemnestra’s speech at 1380 below, where they do seem more appropriate. 

[^note-231]: *. . . harvest times*: At this point in the manuscript two lines appear to be missing. 

[^note-232]: *DIOSCOURI*: It is not clear which of the twin brothers speaks to the human characters or whether they alternate or speak together. 

[^note-233]: *. . . mad fit.* The Keres are the children of Night, death spirits who prey on living human beings. Although they are different from the Furies (who chase down those who have committed murder in the family), here their function seems quite similar. 

[^note-234]: *. . . of his daughter*: Ares, son of Zeus and god of war, killed Poseidon’s son, Halirrothius, over the attempted rape of Ares’ daughter, Alcippe. Ares was put on trial on Olympus and acquitted by the gods. 

[^note-235]: *. . . off to Troy*: In Homer’s account (in the Odyssey) Menelaus and Helen take a long time to get home from Troy, being blown off course and spending a few years in Egypt. Proteus is the Old Man of the Sea, who helps Menelaus in Egypt. The story of Helen’s being detained in Egypt on her way to Troy and never going to the city at all is not in Homer’s epic, but was known before Euripides makes use of it here and in his play Helen. 

[^note-236]: *. . . blessed hill of Cecrops*: The Isthmus is the Isthmus of Corinth, a narrow strip of land joining the Peloponnese (where Argos is situated) with the main part of Greece. Cecrops is the mythical first king and founder of Athens. The Cecropian Hill is a reference to the Acropolis in Athens. 
  
  

