# (SOPHOCLES) Oedipus the King {#sophocles_book-1}      
  
C> *This edition is based on the [publicly available](http://records.viu.ca/~Johnstoi/sophocles/OedipustheKing.htm) translation by Ian Johnston*  
  
  
**BACKGROUND NOTE**      
    
Sophocles (495 BC-405 BC) was a famous and successful Athenian writer of tragedies in his own lifetime. Of his 120 plays, only 7 have survived. *Oedipus the King*, also called *Oedipus Tyrannos* or *Oedipus Rex*, written around 420 BC, has long been regarded not only as his finest play but also as the purest and most powerful expression of Greek tragic drama.  
  
Oedipus, a stranger to Thebes, became king of the city after the murder of king Laius, about fifteen or sixteen years before the start of the play. He was offered the throne because he was successful in saving the city from the Sphinx, an event referred to repeatedly in the text of the play. He married Laius’ widow,Jocasta, and had four children with her, two sons, Eteocles and Polyneices, and two daughters, Antigone and Ismene.  
  
  

**DRAMATIS PERSONAE**  
  
OEDIPUS: king of Thebes  
PRIEST: the high priest of Thebes  
CREON: Oedipus’ brother-in-law  
CHORUS of Theban elders  
TEIRESIAS: an old blind prophet  
BOY: attendant on Teiresias  
JOCASTA: wife of Oedipus, sister of Creon  
MESSENGER: an old man  
SERVANT: an old shepherd  
SECOND MESSENGER: a servant of Oedipus  
ANTIGONE: daughter of Oedipus and Jocasta, a child  
ISMENE: daughter of Oedipus and Jocasta, a child  
SERVANTS and ATTENDANTS on Oedipus and Jocasta  
  
*[The action takes place in Thebes in front of the royal palace. The main doors are directly facing the audience. There are altars beside the doors. A crowd of citizens carrying laurel branches garlanded with wool and led by the PRIEST has gathered in front of the altars, with some people sitting on the altar steps. OEDIPUS enters through the palace doors]*  
  
  
OEDIPUS  
My children, latest generation born from Cadmus,  
why are you sitting here with wreathed sticks  
in supplication to me, while the city  
fills with incense, chants, and cries of pain? [^note-101]      
Children, it would not be appropriate for me  
to learn of this from any other source,  
so I have come in person—I, Oedipus,  
whose fame all men acknowledge. But you there,  
old man, tell me—you seem to be the one  
who ought to speak for those assembled here.  
What feeling brings you to me—fear or desire?      
You can be confident that I will help.  
I shall assist you willingly in every way.  
I would be a hard-hearted man indeed,  
if I did not pity suppliants like these.  
    
PRIEST  
Oedipus, ruler of my native land,  
you see how people here of every age  
are crouching down around your altars,  
some fledglings barely strong enough to fly  
and others bent by age, with priests as well—                                          
for I’m priest of Zeus—and these ones here,  
the pick of all our youth. The other groups  
sit in the market place with suppliant branches  
or else in front of Pallas’ two shrines,                                                                                   
or where Ismenus prophesies with fire. [^note-102]      
For our city, as you yourself can see,  
is badly shaken—she cannot raise her head  
above the depths of so much surging death.  
Disease infects fruit blossoms in our land,  
disease infects our herds of grazing cattle,                                                          
makes women in labour lose their children,  
and deadly pestilence, that fiery god,  
swoops down to blast the city, emptying  
the House of Cadmus, and fills black Hades                                                      
with groans and howls. These children and myself  
now sit here by your home, not because we think  
you’re equal to the gods. No. We judge you  
the first of men in what happens in this life  
and in our interactions with the gods.  
For you came here, to our Cadmeian city,                                                            
and freed us from the tribute we were paying  
to that cruel singer—and yet you knew  
no more than we did and had not been taught. [^note-103]      
In their stories, the people testify  
how, with gods’ help, you gave us back our lives.  
So now, Oedipus, our king, most powerful                                                                       
in all men’s eyes, we’re here as suppliants,  
all begging you to find some help for us,  
either by listening to a heavenly voice,  
or learning from some other human being.                                                        
For, in my view, men of experience  
provide advice that gives the best results.  
So now, you best of men, raise up our state.  
Act to consolidate your fame, for now,  
thanks to your eagerness in earlier days,  
the city celebrates you as its saviour.  
Don’t let our memory of your ruling here                                                                          
declare that we were first set right again  
and later fell. No. Restore our city,  
so that it stands secure. In those times past                                             
you brought us joy—and with good omens, too.  
Be that same man today. If you’re to rule  
as you are doing now, better to be king  
in a land of men than in a desert.  
An empty ship or city wall is nothing  
if no men share a life together there.  
    
OEDIPUS  
My poor children, I know why you have come—    
I am not ignorant of what you yearn for.  
For I understand that you are ill, and yet,                                                                          
sick as you are, there is not one of you                                                      
whose illness equals mine. Your agony  
comes to each one of you as his alone,  
a special pain for him and no one else.  
But here in my heart, I sorrow for myself,  
and for the city, and for you—all together.  
You are not rousing me from a deep sleep.  
You must know I’ve been shedding many tears  
and, in my wandering thoughts, exploring  
many pathways. After a careful search  
I grasped the only help that I could find                                                    
and acted on it. So I have sent away  
my brother-in-law, son of Menoeceus,  
Creon, to Pythian Apollo’s shrine,                                                                         
to learn from him what I might do or say  
to save our city. But when I count the days—    
the time he’s been away—I now worry  
what he’s doing. For he’s been gone too long,  
well past the time he should have taken.  
But when he comes, I’ll be a wicked man  
if I do not act on all the god reveals.                                                                       
    
PRIEST  
What you have said is most appropriate,  
for these men here have just informed me  
that Creon is approaching.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Lord Apollo,                                                            
as he returns may fine shining fortune,  
bright as his countenance, attend on him.  
    
PRIEST  
It seems the news he brings is good—if not,  
he would not wear that wreath around his head,  
a laurel thickly packed with berries. [^note-104]      
    
OEDIPUS  
We’ll know soon enough—he’s within earshot.  
    
[Enter CREON. OEDIPUS calls to him as he approaches]  

My royal kinsman, child of Menoeceus,                                                       
what message do you bring us from the god?  
    
CREON  
Good news, I tell you. If things work out well,  
then these troubles, so difficult to bear,  
will end up bringing us great benefits.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What is the oracle? So far your words  
inspire in me no confidence or fear.                                                                                     
    
CREON  
If you wish to hear the news in public,  
I’m prepared to speak. Or we could step inside.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Speak out to everyone. The grief I feel  
for these citizens is even greater                                                                 
than any pain I feel for my own life.  
    
CREON  
Then let me report what I heard from the god.  
Lord Phoebus clearly orders us to drive away  
the polluting stain this land has harboured.  
It will not be healed if we keep nursing it.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What sort of cleansing? And this disaster—    
how did it happen?  
    
CREON  
By banishment—                                              
or atone for murder by shedding blood again,  
for blood brings on the storm which blasts our state.  
    
OEDIPUS  
And the one whose fate the god revealed—                                             
what sort of man is he?  
    
CREON  
Before you came, my lord,  
to steer our ship of state, Laius ruled this land.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I have heard that, but I never saw the man.  
    
CREON  
Laius was killed. And now the god is clear:    
those murderers, he tells us, must be punished,  
whoever they may be.  
    
OEDIPUS  
And where are they?  
In what country? Where am I to find a trace  
of this ancient crime? It will be hard to track.  
    
CREON  
Here in Thebes, so said the god. What is sought  
is found, but what is overlooked escapes.  
  
OEDIPUS  
When Laius fell in bloody death, where was he—    
at home, or in his fields, or in another land?  
    
CREON  
He was abroad, on his way to Delphi—    
that’s what he told us. He began the trip,  
but did not return.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Was there no messenger—  
no companion who made the journey with him  
and witnessed what took place—a person  
who might provide some knowledge men could use?  
    
CREON  
They all died—except for one who was afraid  
and ran away. There was only one thing                                                    
he could inform us of with confidence  
about the things he saw.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What was that?  
We might get somewhere if we had one fact—                                                              
we could find many things, if we possessed  
some slender hope to get us going.  
    
CREON  
He told us it was robbers who attacked them—    
not just a single man, a gang of them—    
they came on with force and killed him.  
    
OEDIPUS  
How would a thief have dared to do this,  
unless he had financial help from Thebes?                                                         
    
CREON  
That’s what we guessed. But once Laius was dead  
we were in trouble, so no one sought revenge.  
    
OEDIPUS  
When the ruling king had fallen in this way,  
what bad trouble blocked your path, preventing you  
from looking into it?  
    
CREON  
It was the Sphinx—                                        
she sang her cryptic song and so forced us  
to put aside something we found obscure  
to look into the problem we now faced.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Then I will start afresh, and once again  
shed light on darkness. It is most fitting                                                   
that Apollo demonstrates his care  
for the dead man, and worthy of you, too.  
And so you’ll see how I will work with you,  
as is right, seeking vengeance for this land,  
as well as for the god. This polluting stain  
I will remove, not for some distant friends,  
but for myself. For whoever killed this man  
may soon enough desire to turn his hand                                                                         
to punish me in the same way, as well.  
Thus, in avenging Laius, I serve myself.                                                               
But now, my children, quickly as you can  
stand up from these altar steps and raise  
your suppliant branches. Someone must call  
the Theban people to assemble here.  
I’ll do everything I can. With the god’s help  
this will all come to light successfully,  
or else will prove our common ruin.  
    
[OEDIPUS and CREON go into the palace]    
    
PRIEST  
Let us get up, children. For this man  
has willingly declared just what we came for.  
And may Phoebus, who sent this oracle,                                                               
come as our saviour and end our sickness.                                                                       
    
[The PRIEST and the CITIZENS leave. Enter the CHORUS OF THEBAN ELDERS]    
    
CHORUS  
O sweet speaking voice of Zeus,  
you have come to glorious Thebes from golden Pytho—    
but what is your intent?  
My fearful heart twists on the rack and shakes with fear.  
O Delian healer, for whom we cry aloud  
in holy awe, what obligation  
will you demand from me, a thing unknown  
or now renewed with the revolving years?  
Immortal voice, O child of golden Hope,                                                 
speak to me!  
  
First I call on you, Athena the immortal,  
daughter of Zeus, and on your sister, too,  
Artemis, who guards our land and sits  
on her glorious round throne in our market place,  
and on Phoebus, who shoots from far away.  
O you three guardians against death,  
appear to me!  
If before now you have ever driven off  
a fiery plague to keep disaster                                                       
from the city and have banished it,  
then come to us this time as well!  
    
Alas, the pains I bear are numberless—    
my people now all sick with plague,  
our minds can find no weapons                                                                          
to help with our defence. Now the offspring  
of our splendid earth no longer grow,  
nor do our women crying out in labour  
get their relief from a living new-born child.  
As you can see—one by one they swoop away,                                           
off to the shores of the evening god, like birds  
faster than fire which no one can resist.  
    
Our city dies—we’ve lost count of all the dead.  
Her sons lie in the dirt unpitied, unlamented.                                                         
Corpses spread the pestilence, while youthful wives  
and grey-haired mothers on the altar steps  
wail everywhere and cry in supplication,  
seeking to relieve their agonizing pain.  
Their solemn chants ring out—    
they mingle with the voices of lament.                                                    
O Zeus’ golden daughter,  
send your support and strength,  
your lovely countenance!  
    
And that ravenous Ares, god of killing,                                                      
who now consumes me as he charges on  
with no bronze shield but howling battle cries,  
let him turn his back and quickly leave this land,  
with a fair following wind to carry him  
to the great chamber of Amphitrite  
or inhospitable waves of Thrace. [^note-105]      
    
For if destruction does not come at night,  
then day arrives to see it does its work.  
O you who wield that mighty flash of fire,                                                                 
O father Zeus, with your lighting blast  
let Ares be destroyed!  
    
O Lycean lord, how I wish those arrows  
from the golden string of your bent bow  
with their all-conquering force would wing out  
to champion us against our enemy,  
and I pray for those blazing fires of Artemis                                              
with which she races through the Lycian hills. [^note-106]      
I call the god who binds his hair with gold,  
the one whose name our country shares,                                                                  
the one to whom the Maenads shout their cries,  
Dionysus with his radiant face—    
may he come to us with his flaming torchlight,  
our ally against Ares,  
a god dishonoured among gods. [^note-107]    
    
[Enter OEDIPUS from the palace]    
    
OEDIPUS  
You pray. But if you listen now to me,  
you’ll get your wish. Hear what I have to say                                             
and treat your own disease—then you may hope  
to find relief from your distress. I speak  
as one who is a stranger to the story,  
a stranger to the crime. If I alone  
were tracking down this act, I’d not get far                                                                      
without a single clue. But as things stand,  
for it was after the event that I became  
a citizen of Thebes, I now proclaim  
the following to all of you Cadmeians:    
Whoever among you knows the man it was                                              
who murdered Laius, son of Labdacus,  
I order him to reveal it all to me.  
And if the killer is afraid, I tell him  
to avoid the danger of the major charge  
by speaking out against himself. If so,  
he will be sent out from this land unhurt  
and undergo no further punishment.  
If someone knows the killer is a stranger,                                                                         
from some other state, let him not stay mute.  
As well as a reward, he’ll earn my thanks.                                                             
But if he remains quiet, if anyone,  
through fear, hides himself or a friend of his  
against my orders, here’s what I shall do—    
so listen to my words. For I decree  
that no one in this land, in which I rule  
as your own king, shall give that killer shelter  
or talk to him, whoever he may be,  
or act in concert with him during prayers,  
or sacrifice, or sharing lustralwater. [^note-108]                                                                   
Ban him from your homes, every one of you,                                                     
for he is our pollution, as the Pythian god  
In this, I’m acting as an ally of the god  
and also of dead Laius. And I pray  
whoever the man is who did this crime,  
one unknown person acting on his own  
or with companions, the worst of agonies  
will wear out his wretched life. I pray, too,  
that, if he should become an honoured guest  
in my own home and with my knowledge,             
I may suffer all those things I’ve just called down  
upon the killers. And I urge you now  
to make sure all these orders take effect,  
for my sake, for the sake of the god,  
and for our barren, godless, ruined land.  
For in this matter, even if a god  
were not urging us, it would not be right  
for you to simply leave things as they are  
and not to purify the murder of a man  
who was so noble and who was your king.                                                           
You should have looked into it. But now I  
possess the ruling power which Laius held  
in earlier days. I have his bed and wife—                                                                          
she would have borne his children, if his hopes  
to have a son had not been disappointed.  
Children from a common mother might have linked  
Laius and myself. But as it turned out,  
Fate swooped down onto his head. So now,  
I’ll fight on his behalf, as if this matter  
concerned my own father, and I will strive                                                
to do everything I can to find him,  
the man who spilled his blood, and thus avenge  
the son of Labdacus and Polydorus,  
of Cadmus and Agenor from old times. [^note-109]      
As for those who do not follow what I urge,  
I pray the gods send them no fertile land,  
no, nor any children in their women’s wombs—                                                           
may they all perish in our present fate  
or one more hateful still. To you others,  
you Cadmeians who support my efforts,                                                               
may Justice, our ally, and all the gods  
attend on us with kindness all our days.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
My lord, since you extend your oath to me,  
I will say this. I am not the murderer,  
nor can I tell you who the killer is.  
As for what you’re seeking, it’s for Apollo,  
who launched this search, to state who did it.  
    
OEDIPUS  
That is well said. But no man has power                                                              
to force the gods to speak against their will.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
May I then suggest what seems to me                                                       
the next best course of action?  
    
OEDIPUS  
You may indeed,  
and if there is a third course, too, don’t hesitate  
to let me know.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
Our lord Teiresias,  
I know, can see into things, like lord Apollo.  
From him, my king, a man investigating this  
might well find out clear details of the crime.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I’ve taken care of that—it’s not something  
I could overlook. At Creon’s urging,  
I have dispatched two messengers to him  
and have been wondering for some time now                                          
why he has not come.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
Apart from that,  
there are rumours—but inconclusive ones                                                                      
from a long time ago.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What kind of rumours?  
I’m looking into every story.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
It was said  
that Laius was killed by certain travellers.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Yes, I heard as much. But no one has seen  
the one who did it.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
Well, if the killer  
has any fears, once he hears your curses on him,  
he will not hold back, for they are serious.  
    
OEDIPUS  
When a man has no fear of doing the act,                                                            
he’s not afraid of words.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
No, not in the case  
where no one stands there to convict him.  
But at last Teiresias is being guided here,  
our god-like prophet, in whom truth resides  
more so than in all other men.  
    
[Enter TEIRESIAS led by a small BOY]    
    
OEDIPUS  
Teiresias,                                               
you who understand all things—what can be taught  
and what cannot be spoken of, what goes on  
in heaven and here on the earth—you know,  
although you cannot see, how sick our state is.  
And so we find in you alone, great seer,                                                                 
our shield and saviour. For Phoebus Apollo,  
in case you have not heard the news, has sent us  
an answer to our question: the only cure  
for this infecting pestilence is to find  
the men who murdered Laius and kill them  
or else expel them from this land as exiles.  
So do not withhold from us your prophecies                                                                  
from voices of the birds or by some other means.  
Save this city and yourself. Rescue me.  
Deliver us from all pollution by the dead.                                                            
We are in your hands. For a mortal man  
the finest labour he can do is help  
with all his power other human beings.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
Alas, alas! How dreadful it can be  
to have wisdom when it brings no benefit  
to the man possessing it. This I knew,  
but it had slipped my mind. Otherwise,  
I would not have journeyed here.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What is wrong? You have come, but seem distressed.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
Let me go home. You must bear your burden  
to the very end, and I will carry mine,  
if you’ll agree with me.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What you are saying  
is not customary and shows little love  
toward the city state which nurtured you,  
if you deny us your prophetic voice.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
I see your words are also out of place.  
I do not speak for fear of doing the same.  
    
OEDIPUS  
If you know something, then, by the gods,  
do not turn away. We are your suppliants—    
all of us—we bend our knees to you.                                                                       
    
TEIRESIAS  
You are all ignorant. I will not reveal  
the troubling things inside me, nor will I state  
they are your griefs as well.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What are you saying?                                                           
Do you know and will not say? Do you intend  
to betray me and destroy the city?  
    
TEIRESIAS  
I will cause neither me nor you distress.  
Why do you vainly question me like this?  
You will not learn a thing from me.  
    
OEDIPUS  
You most disgraceful of disgraceful men!  
You would move something made of stone to rage!                                       
Will you not speak out? Will your stubbornness  
never have an end?  
    
TEIRESIAS  
You blame my nature,  
but do not see the temper you possess.  
Instead, you’re finding fault with me.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What man who listened to these words of yours  
would not be enraged—you insult the city!                                                                      
    
TEIRESIAS  
Yet events will still unfold, for all my silence.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Since they will come, you must inform me.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
I will say nothing more. Fume on about it,  
if you wish, as fiercely as you can.                                                                             
    
OEDIPUS  
I will. In my anger I will not conceal  
just what I make of this. You should know  
I get the feeling you conspired in the act  
and played your part, as much as you could do,  
short of killing him with your own hands.  
If you could use your eyes, I would have said  
that you had done this work all by yourself.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
Is that so? Then I would ask you to stand by                                                       
the very words which you yourself proclaimed  
and from now on not speak to these men or me.                                             
For the accursed polluter of this land is you.  
    
OEDIPUS  
You dare to utter shameful words like this?  
Do you think you can get away with it?  
    
TEIRESIAS  
I am getting away with it. The truth  
within me makes me strong.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Who taught you this?  
It could not have been your craft.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
You did.  
I did not want to speak, but you incited me.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What do you mean? Speak it again,  
so I can understand you more precisely.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
Did you not grasp my words before,                                                           
or are you trying to test me with your question?                                                           
    
OEDIPUS  
I did not fully understand your words.  
Tell me again.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
I say that you yourself  
are the very man you’re looking for.  
    
OEDIPUS  
That’s twice you’ve stated that disgraceful lie—    
something you’ll regret.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
Shall I tell you more,  
so you can grow even more enraged?  
    
OEDIPUS  
As much as you desire. It will be useless.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
I say that with your dearest family,  
unknown to you, you are living in disgrace.                                                        
You have no idea how bad things are.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Do you really think you can just speak out,  
say things like this, and still remain unpunished?  
    
TEIRESIAS  
Yes, I can, if the truth has any strength.  
    
OEDIPUS  
It does, but not for you. Truth is not in you—                                                     
for your ears, your mind, your eyes are blind!  
    
TEIRESIAS  
You are a wretched fool to use harsh words  
which all men soon enough will use to curse you.  
    
OEDIPUS  
You live in endless darkness of the night,  
so you can never injure me or any man                                                    
who can glimpse daylight.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
It is not your fate  
to fall because of me. Lord Apollo  
will make that happen. He will be enough.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Is this something Creon has devised,  
or is it your invention?  
    
TEIRESIAS  
Creon is no threat.  
You have made this trouble on your own.  
    
OEDIPUS  
O wealth and ruling power, skill after skill                                                         
surpassing all in life’s rich rivalries,  
how much envy you must carry with you,  
if, for this kingly office—which the city                                                    
gave me, for I did not seek it out—    
Creon, my old trusted family friend,  
has secretly conspired to overthrow me  
and paid off a double-dealing quack like this,  
a crafty bogus priest, who can only see  
his own advantage, who in his special art  
is absolutely blind. Come on, tell me                                                                    
how you have ever given evidence  
of your wise prophecy. When the Sphinx,  
that singing bitch, was here, you said nothing                                        
to set the people free. Why not? Her riddle  
was not something the first man to stroll along  
could solve—a prophet was required. And there  
the people saw your knowledge was no use—    
nothing from birds or picked up from the gods.  
But then I came, Oedipus, who knew nothing.  
Yet I finished her off, using my wits  
rather than relying on birds. That’s the man  
you want to overthrow, hoping, no doubt,  
to stand up there with Creon, once he’s king.  
But I think you and your conspirator in this  
will regret trying to drive me from the state.  
If you did not look so old, you’d find out  
the punishment your arrogance deserves.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
To us it sounds as if Teiresias  
has spoken in anger, and, Oedipus,  
you have done so, too. That isn’t what we need.  
Instead we should be looking into this:    
How can we best act on the god’s decree?  
    
TEIRESIAS  
You may be king, but I do have the right                                                   
to answer you—and I control that right,  
for I am not your slave. I serve Apollo,                                                                 
and thus will never stand with Creon,  
signed up as his man. So I say this to you,  
since you have chosen to insult my blindness—    
you have your eyesight, and you do not see  
how miserable you are, or where you live,  
or who it is who shares your household.  
Do you know the family you come from?  
Without your knowledge you have turned into                                        
the enemy of your own relatives,  
those in the world below and those up here,  
and the dreadful scourge of that two-edged curse  
of father and mother will one day drive you  
from this land in exile. Those eyes of yours,  
which now can see so clearly, will be dark.  
What harbour will not echo with your cries?                                                                  
Where on Cithaeron will they not soon be heard,  
once you have learned the truth about the wedding  
by which you sailed into this royal house—                                            
a lovely voyage, but the harbour’s doomed? [^note-110]      
You have no notion of the quantity  
of other troubles which will render you  
and your own children equals. So go on—    
keep insulting Creon and my prophecies,  
for among all living mortals nobody  
will be destroyed more wretchedly than you.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Must I tolerate this insolence from him?  
Get out, and may the plague get rid of you!                                                                    
Off with you! Now! Turn your back and go!                                                      
And don’t come back here to my home again.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
I would not have come, but you summoned me.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I did not know you would speak so stupidly.  
If I had, you would have waited a long time  
before I called you here.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
I was born like this.  
You think I am a fool, but to your parents,  
the ones who made you, I was wise enough.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Wait! My parents? Who was my father?  
    
TEIRESIAS  
This day will reveal that and destroy you.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Everything you speak is all so cryptic—                                                   
like a riddle.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
Well, in solving riddles,                                                      
are you not the best there is?  
    
OEDIPUS  
Mock my excellence,  
but you will find out I am truly great.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
That success of yours has been your ruin.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I do not care, if I have saved the city.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
I will go now. Boy, lead me away.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Yes, let him guide you back. You’re in the way.  
If you stay, you will provoke me. Once you’re gone,  
you won’t annoy me further.  
    
TEIRESIAS  
I’m going.  
But first I shall tell you why I came.                                                                        
I do not fear the face of your displeasure—    
there is no way you can destroy me. I tell you,  
the man you have been seeking all this time,  
while proclaiming threats and issuing orders                                                                 
about the one who murdered Laius—    
that man is here. According to reports,  
he is a stranger who lives here in Thebes.  
But he will prove to be a native Theban.  
From that change he will derive no pleasure.  
He will be blind, although he now can see.                                                         
He will be a poor, although he now is rich.  
He will set off for a foreign country,  
groping the ground before him with a stick.  
And he will turn out to be the brother  
of the children in his house—their father, too,  
both at once, and the husband and the son  
of the very woman who gave birth to him.  
He sowed the same womb as his father  
and murdered him. Go in and think on this.                                                                   
If you discover I have spoken falsely,                                                                      
you can say I lack all skill in prophecy.  
    
[Exit TEIRESIAS led off by the BOY. OEDIPUS turns and goes back into the palace]    
    
CHORUS  
Speaking from the Delphic rock  
the oracular voice intoned a name.  
But who is the man, the one  
who with his blood-red hands  
has done unspeakable brutality?  
The time has come for him to flee—    
to move his powerful foot  
more swiftly than those hooves  
of horses riding like a storm.                                                                                       
Against him Zeus’ son now springs,                                                                                      
armed with lightning fire and leading on  
the inexorable and terrifying Furies. [^note-111]    
    
From the snowy peaks of Mount Parnassus  
the message has just flashed, ordering all  
to seek the one whom no one knows. [^note-112]    
Like a wild bull he wanders now,  
hidden in the untamed wood,  
through rocks and caves, alone  
with his despair on joyless feet,                                                                                  
keeping his distance from that doom  
uttered at earth’s central navel stone.                                                                   
But that fatal oracle still lives,  
hovering above his head forever.  
    
That wise interpreter of prophecies  
stirs up my fears, unsettling dread.  
I cannot approve of what he said  
and I cannot deny it.  
I am confused. What shall I say?  
My hopes are fluttering here and there,  
with no clear glimpse of past or future.                                                     
I have never heard of any quarrelling,  
past or present, between those two,  
the house of Labdacus and Polybus’ son,                                                           
which could give me evidence enough  
to undermine the fame of Oedipus,  
as he seeks vengeance for the unsolved murder  
in the family line of Labdacus. [^note-113]    
    
Apollo and Zeus are truly wise—    
they understand what humans do.  
But there is no sure way to ascertain                                                          
if human prophets grasp things any more  
than I do, although in wisdom one man                                                                             
may leave another far behind.  
But until I see the words confirmed,  
I will not approve of any man  
who censures Oedipus, for it was clear  
when that winged Sphinx went after him  
he was a wise man then. We witnessed it.  
He passed the test and endeared himself  
to all the city. So in my thinking now  
he never will be guilty of a crime.  
    
[Enter CREON]    
    
CREON  
You citizens, I have just discovered  
that Oedipus, our king, has levelled charges  
against me, disturbing allegations.  
That I cannot bear, so I have come here.  
In these present troubles, if he believes  
that he has suffered injury from me,  
in word or deed, then I have no desire  
to keep on living into ripe old age  
still bearing his reproach. For me                                                              
the injury produced by this report  
is not a single isolated matter—                                                                                                    
no, it has the greatest scope of all,  
if I end up being called a wicked man  
here in the city, a bad citizen,  
by you and by my friends.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
Perhaps he charged you  
spurred on by the rash power of his rage,  
rather than his mind’s true judgment.  
    
CREON  
Was it publicized that my persuasion  
convinced Teiresias to utter lies?                                                                             
    
CHORUS LEADER  
That’s what was said. I have no idea  
just what that meant.  
    
CREON  
Did he accuse me  
and announce the charges with a steady gaze,  
in a normal state of mind?  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
I do not know.                                                                
What those in power do I do not see.  
But he’s approaching from the palace—    
here he comes in person.  
    
[Enter OEDIPUS from the palace]    
    
OEDIPUS  
You! How did you get here?  
Have you grown so bold-faced that you now come  
to my own home—you who are obviously  
the murderer of the man whose house it was,                                          
a thief who clearly wants to steal my throne?  
Come, in the name of all the gods, tell me this—    
did you plan to do it because you thought  
I was a coward or a fool? Or did you think  
I would not learn about your actions  
as they crept up on me with such deceit—    
or that, if I knew, I could not deflect them?  
This attempt of yours, is it not madness—                                                                       
to chase after the king’s place without friends,  
without a horde of men, to seek a goal                                                       
which only gold or factions could attain?  
    
CREON  
Will you listen to me? It’s your turn now  
to let me make a suitable response.  
Once you hear that, then judge me for yourself.  
    
OEDIPUS  
You are a clever talker. But from you  
I will learn little. I know you now—    
a troublemaker, an enemy of mine.  
    
CREON  
At least first listen to what I have to say.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Do not bother trying to convince me  
that you have done no wrong.  
    
CREON  
If you think being stubborn                                              
and forgetting common sense is wise,  
then you’re not thinking as you should.                                                                             
    
OEDIPUS  
And if you think you can try to harm  
a man who is a relative of yours  
and escape without a penalty  
then you have not been thinking wisely.  
    
CREON  
I agree. What you’ve just said makes sense.  
So tell me the nature of the damage  
you claim you’re suffering because of me.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Did you or did you not persuade me                                                          
to send for Teiresias, that prophet?  
    
CREON  
Yes. And I’d still give you the same advice.  
    
OEDIPUS  
How long is it since Laius . . . [pauses]    
    
CREON  
Did what?  
What’s Laius got to do with anything?  
    
OEDIPUS  
      . . . since Laius was carried off and disappeared,  
since he was killed so brutally?                                                                                                
    
CREON  
A long time—    
many years have passed since then.  
    
OEDIPUS  
At that time,  
was Teiresias as skilled in prophecy?  
    
CREON  
Then, as now, he was honoured for his wisdom.  
    
OEDIPUS  
And back then did he ever mention me?                                                   
    
CREON  
No, never—not while I was with him.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Did you not investigate the killing?  
    
CREON  
Yes, of course we did. But we found nothing.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Why did this man, this wise man, not speak up?  
    
CREON  
I do not know. And when I don’t know something,  
I like to hold my tongue.  
    
OEDIPUS  
You know enough—                                                    
at least you understand enough to say . . .  
    
CREON  
What? If I really do know something  
I will not deny it.  
    
OEDIPUS  
If Teiresias  
were not working with you, he would not name me                                
as the one who murdered Laius.  
    
CREON  
If he says this,  
well, you’re the one who knows. But I think  
the time has come for me to question you  
the way that you’ve been questioning me.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Ask whatever you wish. You’ll never prove  
that I’m the murderer.  
    
CREON  
Then tell me this—    
are you not married to my sister?  
    
OEDIPUS  
Since you ask me, yes. I don’t deny that.  
    
CREON  
And you two rule this land as equals?  
    
OEDIPUS  
Whatever she desires, she gets from me.  
  
CREON  
And am I not third, equal to you both?  
    
OEDIPUS  
That’s what makes your friendship so deceitful.  
    
CREON  
No, not if you think this through, as I do.  
First, consider this. In your view, would anyone  
prefer to rule and have to cope with fear  
rather than live in peace, carefree and safe,  
if his powers were the same? I, for one,  
have no natural desire to be king  
in preference to performing royal acts.  
The same is true of any other man                                                             
whose understanding grasps things properly.  
For now I get everything I want from you,                                                                        
but without the fear. If I were king myself,  
I’d be doing many things against my will.  
So how can being a king be sweeter to me  
than royal power without anxiety?  
I am not yet so mistaken in my mind  
that I want things which bring no benefits.  
Now all men are my friends and wish me well,  
and those who seek to get something from you                                       
now flatter me, since I’m the one who brings  
success in what they want. So why would I  
give up such benefits for something else?  
A mind that’s wise will not turn treacherous.                                                                  
It’s not my nature to love such policies.  
And if another man pursued such things,  
I would not work with him. I could not bear to.  
If you want proof of this, then go to Delphi.  
Ask the prophet if I brought back to you  
exactly what was said. At that point,                                                                        
if you discover I have planned something,  
that I’ve conspired with Teiresias,  
then arrest me and have me put to death,  
not merely on your own authority,  
but on mine as well, a double judgment.  
Do not condemn me on an unproved charge.  
It’s not fair to judge these things by guesswork,  
to assume bad men are good or good men bad.                                                            
I say a man who throws away a noble friend  
is like a man who parts with his own life,                                                 
the thing most dear to him. Give it some time.  
Then you will see clearly, since only time  
can fully validate a man who’s true.  
A bad man is exposed in just one day.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
For a man concerned about being killed,  
my lord, he has spoken eloquently.  
Those who are unreliable give rash advice.  
    
OEDIPUS  
If some conspirator moves against me,  
in secret and with speed, I must be quick  
to make my counter plans. If I just rest                                                     
and wait for him to act, then he’ll succeed                                                                        
in what he wants to do, and I’ll be finished.  
    
CREON  
What do you want—to exile me from here?  
    
OEDIPUS  
No. I want you to die, not just run off—    
so I can demonstrate what envy means.  
    
CREON  
You are determined not to change your mind  
or listen to me?  
    
OEDIPUS  
You’ll not convince me,  
for there’s no way that I can trust you.  
    
CREON  
I can see that you’ve become unbalanced. [^note-114]      
    
OEDIPUS  
I’m sane enough to defend my interests.                                                   
    
CREON  
You should be protecting mine as well.  
    
OEDIPUS  
But you’re a treacherous man. It’s your nature.  
    
CREON  
What if you’re wrong?  
    
OEDIPUS  
I still have to govern.  
    
CREON  
Not if you do it badly.  
    
OEDIPUS  
O Thebes—    
my city!  
    
CREON  
I, too, have some rights in Thebes—                                        
it is not yours alone.  
    
[The palace doors open]    
    
CHORUS LEADER  
My lords, an end to this.  
I see Jocasta coming from the palace,  
and just in time. With her assistance  
you should bring this quarrel to a close.  
    
[Enter JOCASTA from the palace]    
    
JOCASTA  
You foolish men, why are you arguing                                                       
in such a stupid way? With our land so sick,  
aren’t you ashamed to start a private fight?  
You, Oedipus, go in the house, and you,  
Creon, return to yours. Why inflate  
a trivial matter into something huge?  
    
CREON  
Sister, your husband Oedipus intends  
to punish me in one of two dreadful ways—                                                       
to banish me from my fathers’ country  
or arrest me and then have me killed.  
    
OEDIPUS  
That’s right.  
Lady, I caught him committing treason,                                                                
an vicious crime against me personally.  
    
CREON  
Let me not prosper but die a man accursed,  
if I have done what you accuse me of.  
    
JOCASTA  
Oedipus,  
for the sake of the gods, trust him in this.  
Respect that oath he made before all heaven—    
do it for my sake and for those around you.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
I beg you, my lord, consent to this—    
agree with her.                                                                                                          
    
OEDIPUS  
What is it then  
you’re asking me to do?  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
Pay Creon due respect.  
He has not been foolish in the past, and now                                           
that oath he’s sworn has power.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Are you aware  
just what you’re asking?  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
Yes. I understand.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Then tell me clearly what you mean to say.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
You should not accuse a friend of yours  
and thus dishonour him with a mere story  
which may be false, when he has sworn an oath  
and therefore could be subject to a curse.  
    
OEDIPUS  
By this point you should clearly understand,  
what you are doing when you request this—    
seeking to exile me from Thebes or kill me.                                                        
    
CHORUS LEADER  
No, no, by sacred Helios, the god                                                                          
who stands pre-eminent before the rest!  
May I die the most miserable of deaths,  
abandoned by the gods and by my friends,  
if I have ever harboured such a thought!  
But the destruction of our land wears down  
my troubled heart—and so does this quarrel,  
if you two add new problems to the ones  
which have for so long been afflicting us.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Let him go, then, even though it means                                                     
I must be killed or sent from here in exile,  
forced out in disgrace. I have been moved                                                                      
to act compassionately by what you said,  
not by Creon’s words. But if he stays here,  
he will be hateful to me.  
    
CREON  
You are stubborn—    
obviously unhappy to concede,  
and when you lose your temper, you go too far.  
But men like that find it most difficult  
to tolerate themselves. In that there’s justice.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Why not go—just leave me alone?  
    
CREON  
I’ll leave—                                              
since I see you do not understand me.  
But these men here know I’m a reasonable man.  
    
[Exit CREON away from the palace, leaving OEDIPUS and JOCASTA and the CHORUS on stage]    
    
CHORUS LEADER  
Lady, will you escort our king inside?  
    
JOCASTA  
Yes, once I have learned what happened here.                                                    
    
CHORUS LEADER  
They talked—    
their words gave rise to uninformed suspicions,  
but even unjust words inflict sore wounds.  
    
JOCASTA  
From both of them?  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
Yes.  
    
JOCASTA  
What caused it?  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
With our country already in distress,  
it is enough, it seems to me, enough  
to leave things as they are.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Now do you see                              
the point you’ve reached thanks to your noble wish  
to dissolve and dull what I felt in my heart?  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
My lord, I have declared it more than once,                                                       
so you must know it would have been quite mad  
if I abandoned you, who, when this land,  
my cherished Thebes, was in great trouble,  
set it right again and who, in these harsh times  
     should prove a trusty and successful guide.  
    
JOCASTA  
By all the gods, my king, please let me know  
why in this present matter you now feel                                                    
such unremitting rage.  
    
OEDIPUS  
To you I’ll speak, lady,                                                              
since I respect you more than I do these men.  
It’s Creon’s fault. He conspired against me.  
    
JOCASTA  
In this quarrel what was said? Tell me.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Creon claims that I’m the murderer—    
that I killed Laius.  
    
JOCASTA  
Does he know this first hand,  
or has he picked it up from someone else?  
    
OEDIPUS  
No. He set up that treasonous prophet.  
What he says himself all sounds quite innocent.  
    
JOCASTA  
All right, forget about those things you’ve said.                                       
Listen to me, and ease your mind with this—  
no human being has skill in prophecy.  
I’ll show you why with this example.                                                                                    
King Laius once received a oracle.  
I won’t say it came straight from Apollo,  
but it was from those who do assist the god.  
It said Laius was fated to be killed  
by a child of ours, one born to him and me.  
Now, at least according to the story,  
one day Laius was killed by foreigners,                                                                 
by robbers, at a place where three roads meet.  
Besides, before our child was three days old,  
Laius pinned his ankles tight together  
and ordered other men to throw him out  
on a mountain rock where no one ever goes.  
And so Apollo’s plan that he’d become                                                                               
the one who killed his father didn’t work,  
and Laius never suffered what he feared,  
that his own son would be his murderer,  
although that’s what the oracle had claimed.                                                     
So don’t concern yourself with prophecies.  
Whatever gods intend to bring about  
they themselves make known quite easily.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Lady, as I listen to these words of yours,  
my soul is shaken, my mind confused . . .  
    
JOCASTA  
Why do you say that? What’s worrying you?  
    
OEDIPUS  
I thought I heard you say that Laius  
was murdered at a place where three roads meet.                                                       
    
JOCASTA  
That’s what was said and people still believe.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Where is this place? Where did it happen?                                               
    
JOCASTA  
In a land called Phocis. Two roads lead there—  
one from Delphi and one from Daulia.  
    
OEDIPUS  
How long is it since these events took place?  
    
JOCASTA  
The story was reported in the city  
just before you took over royal power  
here in Thebes.  
    
OEDIPUS  
O Zeus, what have you done?  
What have you planned for me?  
    
JOCASTA  
What is it,  
Oedipus? Why is your spirit so troubled?  
    
OEDIPUS  
Not yet,                                                               
no questions yet. Tell me this—Laius,  
how tall was he? How old a man?                                                                              
    
JOCASTA  
He was big—with hair starting to turn white.  
In shape he was not all that unlike you.  
    
OEDIPUS  
The worse for me! I may have set myself  
under a dreadful curse without my knowledge!  
    
JOCASTA  
What do you mean? As I look at you, my king,  
I start to tremble.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I am afraid,  
full of terrible fears the prophet sees.  
But you can reveal this better if you now  
will tell me one thing more.  
    
JOCASTA  
I’m shaking,  
but if you ask me, I will answer you.                                                                        
    
OEDIPUS  
Did Laius have a small escort with him                                                                
or a troop of soldiers, like a royal king?  
    
JOCASTA  
Five men, including a herald, went with him.  
A carriage carried Laius.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Alas! Alas!  
It’s all too clear! Lady, who told you this?  
    
JOCASTA  
A slave—the only one who got away.  
He came back here.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Is there any chance  
he’s in our household now?  
    
JOCASTA  
No.  
Once he returned and understood that you  
had now assumed the power of slaughtered Laius,                                       
he clasped my hands, begged me to send him off                                                       
to where our animals graze in the fields,  
so he could be as far away as possible  
from the sight of town. And so I sent him.  
He was a slave but he’d earned my gratitude.  
He deserved an even greater favour.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I’d like him to return back here to us,  
and quickly, too.  
    
JOCASTA  
That can be arranged—    
but why’s that something you would want to do?  
    
OEDIPUS  
Lady, I’m afraid I may have said too much.                                               
That’s why I want to see him here before me.  
    
JOCASTA  
Then he will be here. But now, my lord,  
I deserve to know why you are so distressed.                                                      
    
OEDIPUS  
My forebodings now have grown so great  
I will not keep them from you, for who is there  
I should confide in rather than in you  
about such a twisted turn of fortune.  
My father was Polybus of Corinth,  
my mother Merope, a Dorian.  
There I was regarded as the finest man                                                      
in all the city, until, as chance would have it,  
something most astonishing took place,  
though it was not worth what it made me to do.  
At dinner there a man who was quite drunk  
from too much wine began to shout at me,  
claiming I was not my father’s real son.                                                                              
That troubled me, but for a day at least  
I said nothing, though it was difficult.  
The next day I went to ask my parents,  
my father and mother. They were angry                                                    
at the man who had insulted them this way,  
so I was reassured. But nonetheless,  
the accusation always troubled me—    
the story had become known everywhere.  
And so I went in secret off to Delphi.  
I didn’t tell my mother or my father.  
Apollo sent me back without an answer,  
so I didn’t learn what I had come to find.  
But when he spoke he uttered monstrous things,                                                         
strange terrors and horrific miseries—                                                     
     my fate was to defile my mother’s bed,  
to bring forth to men a human family  
that people could not bear to look upon,  
and slay the father who engendered me.  
When I heard that, I ran away from Corinth.  
From then on I thought of it just as a place  
beneath the stars. I went to other lands,  
so I would never see that prophecy fulfilled,  
the abomination of my evil fate.  
In my travelling I came across that place                                                  
in which you say your king was murdered.  
And now, lady, I will tell you the truth.                                                                               
As I was on the move, I passed close by  
a spot where three roads meet, and in that place  
I met a herald and a horse-drawn carriage,  
with a man inside, just as you described.  
The guide there tried to force me off the road—    
and the old man, too, got personally involved.  
In my rage, I lashed out at the driver,  
who was shoving me aside. The old man,                                                  
seeing me walking past him in the carriage,  
kept his eye on me, and with his double whip  
struck me on the head, right here on top.  
Well, I retaliated in good measure—                                                                                    
with the staff I held I hit him a quick blow  
and knocked him from his carriage to the road.  
He lay there on his back. Then I killed them all.  
If that stranger was somehow linked to Laius,  
who is now more unfortunate than me?  
What man could be more hateful to the gods?                                                  
No stranger and no citizen can welcome him  
into their lives or speak to him. Instead,  
they must keep him from their doors, a curse  
I laid upon myself. With these hands of mine,                                                               
these killer’s hands, I now contaminate  
the dead man’s bed. Am I not depraved?  
Am I not utterly abhorrent?  
Now I must fly into exile and there,  
a fugitive, never see my people,  
never set foot in my native land again—                                                   
or else I must get married to my mother  
and kill my father, Polybus, who raised me,  
the man who gave me life. If anyone  
claimed this came from some malevolent god,  
would he not be right? O you gods,  
you pure, blessed gods, may I not see that day!                                                             
Let me rather vanish from the sight of men,  
before I see a fate like that engulf me!  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
My lord, to us these things are ominous.  
But you must sustain your hope until you hear                                        
the servant who was present at the time.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I do have some hope left, at least enough  
to wait for the man we’ve summoned from the fields.  
    
JOCASTA  
Once he comes, what do you hope to hear?  
    
OEDIPUS  
I’ll tell you. If we discover what he says  
matches what you say, then I’ll escape disaster.                                                 
    
JOCASTA  
What was so remarkable in what I said?  
    
OEDIPUS  
You said that in his story the man claimed  
Laius was murdered by a band of thieves.  
If he still says that there were several men,                                               
then I was not the killer, since one man  
could never be mistaken for a crowd.  
But if he says it was a single man,  
the scales of justice guilt sink down on me.  
    
JOCASTA  
Well, that’s certainly what he reported then.  
He cannot now withdraw what he once said.  
The whole city heard him, not just me alone.                                                                  
But even if he changes that old news,  
he cannot ever demonstrate, my lord,  
that Laius’ murder fits the prophecy.                                                                     
For Apollo clearly said the man would die  
at the hands of an infant born from me.  
Now, how did that unhappy son of ours  
kill Laius, when he’d perished long before?  
As far as these predictions go, from now on  
I would not look for confirmation anywhere.  
    
OEDIPUS  
You’re right in what you say. But nonetheless,  
send for that peasant. Don’t fail to do that.                                                                      
    
JOCASTA  
I’ll call him here as quickly as I can.  
Let’s go inside. I’ll not do anything                                                             
which does not meet with your approval.  
    
[OEDIPUS and JOCASTA go into the palace together]    
    
CHORUS  
I pray fate still finds me worthy,  
demonstrating piety and reverence  
in all I say and do—in everything  
our loftiest traditions consecrate,  
those laws engendered in the heavenly skies,  
whose only father is Olympus.  
They were not born from mortal men,  
nor will they sleep and be forgotten.                                                                                     
In them lives an ageless mighty god.                                                                      
    
Insolence gives birth to tyranny—    
that insolence which vainly crams itself  
and overflows with so much wealth  
beyond what’s right or beneficial,  
that once it’s climbed the highest rooftop,  
it’s hurled down by force—such a quick fall  
there’s no safe landing on one’s feet.  
But I pray the god never will abolish  
the type of rivalry that helps our state.                                                                 
That god I will hold onto always,                                                                 
the one who stands as our protector. [^note-115]    
    
But if a man conducts himself  
disdainfully in what he says and does,  
and manifests no fear of righteousness,  
no reverence for the statues of the gods,  
may miserable fate seize such a man  
for his disastrous arrogance,  
if he does not behave with justice                                                                         
when he strives to benefit himself,  
appropriates all things impiously,                                                                             
and, like a fool, profanes the sacred.  
What man is there who does such things  
who can still claim he will ward off  
the arrow of the gods aimed at his heart?  
If such actions are considered worthy,  
why should we dance to honour god?  
    
No longer will I go in reverence  
to the sacred stone, earth’s very centre,  
or to the temple at Abae or Olympia,                                                                                   
if these prophecies fail to be fulfilled                                                        
and manifest themselves to mortal men.  
But you, all-conquering, all-ruling Zeus,  
if by right those names belong to you,  
let this not evade you and your ageless might.  
For ancient oracles which dealt with Laius  
are withering—men now set them aside.  
Nowhere is Apollo honoured publicly,  
and our religious faith is dying away.                                                                                   
    
[JOCASTA enters from the palace and moves to an altar to Apollo which stands outside the palace doors.  
She is accompanied by one or two SERVANTS]    
    
JOCASTA  
You leading citizens of Thebes, I think  
it is appropriate for me to visit                                                                   
our gods’ sacred shrines, bearing in my hands  
this garland and an offering of incense.  
For Oedipus has let excessive pain  
seize on his heart and does not understand  
what’s happening now by thinking of the past,  
like a man with sense. Instead he listens to  
whoever speaks to him of dreadful things.  
I can do nothing more with my advice,  
and so, Lyceian Apollo, I come to you,  
who stand here beside us, a suppliant,  
with offerings and prayers for you to find  
some way of cleansing what corrupts us.  
For now we are afraid, just like those  
who on a ship see their helmsman terrified.  
    
[JOCASTA sets her offerings on the altar. A MESSENGER enters, an older man]    
    
MESSENGER  
Strangers, can you tell me where I find  
the house of Oedipus, your king? Better yet,  
if you know, can you tell me where he is?  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
His home is here, stranger, and he’s inside.  
This lady is the mother of his children.  
    
MESSENGER  
May her happy home always be blessed,                                                   
for she is his queen, true mistress of his house.                                                           
    
JOCASTA  
I wish the same for you, stranger. Your fine words  
make you deserve as much. But tell us now  
why you have come. Do you seek information,  
or do you wish to give us some report?  
    
MESSENGER  
Lady, I have good news for your whole house—    
and for your husband, too.  
    
JOCASTA  
What news is that?  
Where have you come from?  
    
MESSENGER  
I’ve come from Corinth.  
I’ll give you my report at once, and then  
you will, no doubt, be glad, although perhaps                                          
you will be sad, as well.  
    
JOCASTA  
What is your news?  
How can it have two such effects at once?  
    
MESSENGER  
The people who live there, in the lands  
beside the Isthmus, will make him their king. [^note-116]      
They have announced it.                                                                                         
    
JOCASTA  
What are you saying?  
Is old man Polybus no longer king?  
    
MESSENGER  
No. He is dead and in his grave.                       
    
JOCASTA  
What?  
Has Oedipus’ father died?  
    
MESSENGER  
Yes.  
If what I’m telling you is not the truth,  
then I deserve to die.  
    
JOCASTA [to a servant]    
You there—                                               
go at once and tell this to your master.  
    
[SERVANT goes into the palace]    
    
O you oracles of the gods, so much for you.  
Oedipus has for so long been afraid  
that he would murder him. He ran away.  
And now Polybus has died, killed by Fate  
and not by Oedipus.  
    
[Enter OEDIPUS from the palace]    
    
OEDIPUS  
Ah, Jocasta,  
my dearest wife, why have you summoned me                                                              
to leave our home and come out here?  
    
JOCASTA  
You must hear this man, and as you listen,  
decide for yourself what these prophecies,                                                          
these solemn proclamations from the gods,  
amount to.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Who is this man? What report  
does he have for me?  
    
JOCASTA  
He comes from Corinth,  
bringing news that Polybus, your father,  
no longer is alive. He’s dead.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What?  
Stranger, let me hear from you in person.  
    
MESSENGER  
If I must first report my news quite plainly,  
then I should let you know that Polybus  
has passed away. He’s gone.  
    
OEDIPUS  
By treachery,  
or was it the result of some disease?  
  
MESSENGER  
With old bodies a slight weight on the scales  
brings final peace.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Apparently his death  
was from an illness?  
    
MESSENGER  
Yes, and from old age.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Alas! Indeed, lady, why should any man  
pay due reverence to Apollo’s shrine,  
where his prophet lives, or to those birds  
which scream out overhead? For they foretold  
that I was going to murder my own father.  
But now he’s dead and lies beneath the earth,  
and I am here. I never touched my spear.                                                            
Perhaps he died from a desire to see me—    
so in that sense I brought about his death.                                                                       
But as for those prophetic oracles,  
they’re worthless. Polybus has taken them  
to Hades, where he lies.  
    
JOCASTA  
Was I not the one  
who predicted this some time ago?  
    
OEDIPUS  
You did,  
but then I was misguided by my fears.  
    
JOCASTA  
You must not keep on filling up your heart  
with all these things.  
    
OEDIPUS  
But my mother’s bed—    
Surely I should still be afraid of that?                                                                     
    
JOCASTA  
Why should a man whose life seems ruled by chance  
live in fear—a man who never looks ahead,  
who has no certain vision of his future?  
It’s best to live haphazardly, as best one can.  
Do not worry you will wed your mother.                                                                            
It’s true that in their dreams a lot of men  
have slept with their own mothers, but someone  
who ignores all this bears life more easily.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Everything you say would be commendable,  
if my mother were not still alive.                                                                 
But since she is, I must remain afraid,  
though all that you have said is right.  
    
JOCASTA  
But still,  
your father’s death is a great comfort to us.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Yes, it is good, I know. But I do fear  
that lady—she is still alive.  
    
MESSENGER  
This one you fear,  
what kind of woman is she?  
    
OEDIPUS  
Old man,  
her name is Merope, wife to Polybus.                                                                                  
    
MESSENGER  
And what in her makes you so fearful?  
    
OEDIPUS  
Stranger,  
a dreadful prophecy sent from the god.  
    
MESSENGER  
Is it well known? Or something private,                                                     
which other people have no right to know?  
    
OEDIPUS  
No, no. It’s public knowledge. Loxias  
once said it was my fate that I would marry  
my own mother and shed my father’s blood  
with my own hands. [^note-117] That’s why, many years ago,  
I left my home in Corinth. Things turned out well,  
but nonetheless it gives the sweetest joy  
to look into the eyes of one’s own parents.  
    
MESSENGER  
And because you were afraid of her                                                                     
you stayed away from Corinth?  
    
OEDIPUS  
And because                                                
I did not want to be my father’s killer.  
    
MESSENGER  
My lord, since I came to make you happy,  
why do I not relieve you of this fear?  
    
OEDIPUS  
You would receive from me a worthy thanks.  
    
MESSENGER  
That’s really why I came—so your return  
might prove a benefit to me back home.  
    
OEDIPUS  
But I will never go back to my parents.  
    
MESSENGER  
My son, it is so clear you’ve no idea  
what you are doing . . .  
    
OEDIPUS [interrupting]    
What do you mean, old man?  
In the name of all the gods, tell me.                                                                          
    
MESSENGER  
      . . . if that’s the reason you’re a fugitive                                                                
and won’t go home.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I feared Apollo’s prophecy  
might reveal itself in me.  
    
MESSENGER  
You were afraid  
you might become corrupted through your parents?  
    
OEDIPUS  
That’s right, old man. That was my constant fear.  
    
MESSENGER  
Are you aware these fears of yours are groundless?  
    
OEDIPUS  
And why is that? If I was born their child . . .  
    
MESSENGER  
Because you and Polybus were not related.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What do you mean? Was not Polybus my father?  
    
MESSENGER  
He was as much your father as this manhere,                                          
no more, no less.  
    
OEDIPUS  
But how can any man  
who means nothing to me be just the same  
as my own father?  
    
MESSENGER  
But Polybus  
was not your father, no more than I am.                                                                             
    
OEDIPUS  
Then why did he call me his son?  
    
MESSENGER  
If you must know,  
he received you as a gift many years ago.  
I gave you to him.  
    
OEDIPUS  
He really loved me.  
How could he if I came from someone else?  
    
MESSENGER  
Because before you came, he had no children—    
that made him love you.  
    
OEDIPUS  
When you gave me to him,                                         
had you bought me or discovered me by chance?  
    
MESSENGER  
I found you in Cithaeron’s forest valleys.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What were you doing wandering up there?  
    
MESSENGER  
I was looking after flocks of sheep.  
    
OEDIPUS  
You were a shepherd, just a hired servant  
roaming here and there?  
    
MESSENGER  
Yes, my son, I was.  
But at that time I was the one who saved you.                                                                 
    
OEDIPUS  
When you picked me up and took me off,  
what sort of suffering did you save me from?  
    
MESSENGER  
The ankles on your feet could tell you that.                                               
    
OEDIPUS  
Ah, my old misfortune. Why mention that?  
    
MESSENGER  
Your ankles had been pierced and pinned together.  
I set them free.  
    
OEDIPUS  
My dreadful mark of shame—    
I’ve had that scar there since I was a child.  
    
MESSENGER  
That’s why fortune gave you your very name,  
the one which you still carry. [^note-118]      
    
OEDIPUS  
Tell me,  
in the name of heaven, did my parents,  
my father or my mother, do this to me?  
    
MESSENGER  
I don’t know. The man who gave you to me  
knows more of that than I do.  
    
OEDIPUS  
You mean to say                                    
you got me from someone else? It wasn’t you  
who stumbled on me?  
    
MESSENGER  
No, it wasn’t me.  
Another shepherd gave you to me.                                                                                         
    
OEDIPUS  
Who?  
Who was he? Do you know? Can you tell me  
any details, things you are quite sure of?  
    
MESSENGER  
Well, I think he was one of Laius’ servants—    
that’s what people said.  
    
OEDIPUS  
You mean king Laius,  
the one who ruled this country years ago?  
    
MESSENGER  
That’s right. He was one of the king’s shepherds.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Is he still alive? Can I still see him?                                                             
    
MESSENGER  
You people live here. You’d best answer that.  
    
OEDIPUS [turning to the Chorus]      
Do any of you here now know the man,  
this shepherd he describes? Have you seen him,  
either in the fields or here in Thebes?  
Answer me. It’s critical, time at last  
to find out what this means.                                                                                   
    
CHORUS LEADER  
The man he mentioned  
is, I think, the very peasant from the fields  
you wanted to see earlier. But of this  
Jocasta could tell more than anyone.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Lady, do you know the man we sent for—                                                 
just minutes ago—the one we summoned here?  
Is he the one this messenger refers to?  
    
JOCASTA  
Why ask me what he means? Forget all that.  
There’s no point trying to sort out what he said.  
    
OEDIPUS  
With all these indications of the truth  
here in my grasp, I cannot end this now.  
I must reveal the details of my birth.                                 
    
JOCASTA  
In the name of the gods, no! If you have                                                               
some concern for your own life, then stop!  
Do not keep on investigating this.                                                              
I will suffer—that will be enough.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Be brave. Even if I should turn out to be  
born from a shameful mother, whose family  
for three generations have been slaves,  
you will still have your noble lineage.  
    
JOCASTA  
Listen to me, I beg you. Do not do this.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I will not be convinced I should not learn  
the whole truth of what these facts amount to.  
    
JOCASTA  
But I care about your own well being—    
what I tell you is for your benefit.                                                                
    
OEDIPUS  
What you’re telling me for my own good  
just brings me more distress.  
    
JOCASTA  
O you unhappy man!  
May you never find out who you really are!  
    
OEDIPUS [to Chorus]     
Go, one of you, and bring that shepherd here.  
Leave the lady to enjoy her noble line.                                                                                
    
JOCASTA  
Alas, you poor miserable man!  
There’s nothing more that I can say to you.  
     I’ll never speak another word again.  
    
[JOCASTA runs into the palace]    
    
CHORUS LEADER  
Why has the queen rushed off, Oedipus,  
so full of grief? I fear a disastrous storm                                                    
will soon break through her silence.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Then let it break,  
whatever it is. As for myself,  
no matter how base born my family,  
I wish to know the seed from where I came.  
Perhaps my queen is now ashamed of me  
and of my insignificant origin—    
she likes to play the noble lady.  
But I will never feel myself dishonoured.                                                                         
I see myself as a child of Fortune—    
and she is generous, that mother of mine                                                  
from whom I spring, and the months, my siblings,  
have seen me by turns both small and great.  
That’s how I was born. I cannot prove false  
to my own nature, nor can I ever cease  
from seeking out the facts of my own birth.  
    
CHORUS  
If I have any power of prophecy  
or skill in knowing things,  
then, by the Olympian deities,  
you, Cithaeron, at tomorrow’s moon                                                                                     
will surely know that Oedipus                                                                    
pays tribute to you as his native land  
both as his mother and his nurse,  
and that our choral dance and song  
acknowledge you because you are  
so pleasing to our king.  
O Phoebus, we cry out to you—    
may our song fill you with delight!  
    
Who gave birth to you, my child?  
Which one of the immortal gods  
bore you to your father Pan,  
who roams the mountainsides?  
Was it some bedmate of Apollo,  
the god who loves all country fields?  
Perhaps Cyllene’s royal king?  
Or was it the Bacchanalian god  
dwelling on the mountain tops  
who took you as a new-born joy  
from maiden nymphs of Helicon  
with whom he often romps and plays? [^note-119]      
    
OEDIPUS [looking out away from the palace]    
You elders, though I’ve never seen the man  
we’ve been seeking for a long time now,  
if I had to guess, I think I see him.  
He’s coming here. He looks very old—    
as is appropriate, if he’s the one.  
And I know the people coming with him,  
servants of mine. But if you’ve seen him before,  
you’ll recognize him better than I will.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
Yes, I recognize the man. There’s no doubt.  
He worked for Laius—a trusty shepherd.  
    
[Enter SERVANT, an old shepherd]    
    
OEDIPUS  
Stranger from Corinth, let me first ask you—                                           
is this the man you spoke of?  
    
MESSENGER  
Yes, he is—    
he’s the man you see in front of you.                                                                     
    
OEDIPUS  
You, old man, over here. Look at me.  
Now answer what I ask. Some time ago  
did you work for Laius?  
    
SERVANT  
Yes, as a slave.  
But I was not bought. I grew up in his house.  
    
OEDIPUS  
How did you live? What was the work you did?  
    
SERVANT  
Most of my life I’ve spent looking after sheep.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Whereabouts? In what specific places?  
    
SERVANT  
On Cithaeron or the neighbouring lands.                                                  
    
OEDIPUS  
Do you know if you came across this man  
anywhere up there?  
    
SERVANT  
Doing what?  
What man do you mean?  
    
OEDIPUS  
The man over here—    
this one. Have you ever met him before?                                                                          
    
SERVANT  
Right now I can’t say I remember him.  
    
MESSENGER  
My lord, that’s surely not surprising.  
Let me refresh his failing memory.  
I think he will remember all too well  
the time we spent around Cithaeron.  
He had two flocks of sheep and I had one.                                                           
I was with him there for six months at a stretch,  
from early spring until the autumn season.  
In winter I’d drive my sheep down to my folds,  
and he’d take his to pens that Laius owned.  
Isn’t that what happened—what I just said?                                                                    
    
SERVANT  
You spoke the truth. But it was long ago.  
    
MESSENGER  
All right, then. Now, tell me if you recall  
how you gave me a child, an infant boy,  
for me to raise as my own foster son.  
    
SERVANT  
What? Why ask about that?  
    
MESSENGER  
This man here, my friend,                                                            
was that young child back then.  
    
SERVANT  
Damn you!  
Can’t you keep quiet about it!  
    
OEDIPUS  
Hold on, old man.  
Don’t criticize him. What you have said  
is more objectionable than his account.  
    
SERVANT  
My noble master, what have I done wrong?  
    
OEDIPUS  
You did not tell us of that infant boy,                                                                    
the one he asked about.  
    
SERVANT  
That’s what he says,  
but he knows nothing—a useless busybody.  
    
OEDIPUS  
If you won’t tell us of your own free will,  
once we start to hurt you, you will talk.                                                                  
    
SERVANT  
By all the gods, don’t torture an old man!  
    
OEDIPUS  
One of you there, tie up this fellow’s hands.  
    
SERVANT  
Why are you doing this? It’s too much for me!  
What is it you want to know?  
    
OEDIPUS  
That child he mentioned—    
did you give it to him?  
    
SERVANT  
I did. How I wish  
I’d died that day!  
    
OEDIPUS  
Well, you are going to die  
if you don’t speak the truth.  
    
SERVANT  
And if I do,  
the death I suffer will be even worse.  
    
OEDIPUS  
It seems to me the man is trying to stall.                                                              
    
SERVANT  
No, no, I’m not. I’ve already told you—                                                      
I did give him the child.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Where did you get it?  
Did it come from your home or somewhere else?  
    
SERVANT  
It was not mine—I got it from someone.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Which of our citizens? Whose home was it?  
    
SERVANT  
In the name of the gods, my lord, don’t ask!  
Please, no more questions!  
    
OEDIPUS  
If I have to ask again,  
then you will die.  
    
SERVANT  
The child was born in Laius’ house.  
    
OEDIPUS  
From a slave or from some relative of his?  
    
SERVANT  
Alas, what I’m about to say now . . .  
it’s horrible.  
    
OEDIPUS  
It may be horrible,  
but nonetheless I have to hear it.  
    
SERVANT  
If you must know, they said the child was his.  
But your wife inside the palace is the one  
who could best tell you what was going on.  
    
OEDIPUS  
You mean she gave the child to you?  
    
SERVANT  
Yes, my lord.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Why did she do that?  
    
SERVANT  
So I would kill it.  
    
OEDIPUS  
That wretched woman was the mother?  
    
SERVANT  
Yes.  
She was afraid of dreadful prophecies.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What sort of prophecies?  
    
SERVANT  
The story went  
that he would kill his father.  
    
OEDIPUS  
If that was true,                                         
why did you give the child to this old man?  
    
SERVANT  
I pitied the boy, master, and I thought  
he’d take the child off to a foreign land  
where he was from. But he rescued him,  
only to save him for the greatest grief of all.                                                                   
For if you are who this man says you are                                           
you know your birth carried an awful fate.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Ah, so it all came true. It’s so clear now.  
O light, let me look at you one final time,  
a man who stands revealed as cursed by birth,                                                 
cursed by my own family, and cursed  
by murder where I should not kill.  
    
[OEDIPUS moves into the palace]    
    
CHORUS  
O generations of mortal men,  
how I count your life as scarcely living.  
What man is there, what human being,  
who attains a greater happiness                                                                                               
than mere appearances, a joy  
which seems to fade away to nothing?  
Poor wretched Oedipus, your fate  
stands here to demonstrate for me                                                             
how no mortal man is ever blessed.  
    
Here was a man who fired his arrows well—    
his skill was matchless—and he won  
the highest happiness in everything.  
For, Zeus, he slaughtered the hook-taloned Sphinx  
and stilled her cryptic song. For our state,  
he stood there like a tower against death,                                                                          
and from that moment, Oedipus,  
we have called you our king  
and honoured you above all other men,                                                                
the one who rules in mighty Thebes.  
    
But now who is there whose story  
is more terrible to hear? Whose life  
has been so changed by trouble,  
by such ferocious agonies?  
Alas for celebrated Oedipus,  
the same spacious place of refuge  
served you both as child and father,  
the place you entered as a new bridegroom.                                                                    
How could the furrow where your father planted,                                          
poor wretched man, have tolerated you  
in such silence for so long?  
    
Time, which watches everything  
and uncovered you against your will,  
now sits in judgment of that fatal marriage,  
where child and parent have been joined so long.  
O child of Laius, how I wish  
I’d never seen you—now I wail  
like one whose mouth pours forth laments.                                                                     
To tell it right, it was through you                                                               
I found my life and breathed again,  
and then through you the darkness veils my eyes.  
    
[The Second Messenger enters from the palace]    
    
SECOND MESSENGER  
O you most honoured citizens of Thebes,  
what actions you will hear about and see,  
what sorrows you will bear, if, as natives here,  
you are still loyal to the house of Labdacus!  
I do not think the Ister or the Phasis rivers  
could cleanse this house. It conceals too much  
and soon will bring to light the vilest things,  
brought on by choice and not by accident. [^note-120]      
            
What we do to ourselves brings us most pain.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
The calamities we knew about before  
were hard enough to bear. What can you say  
to make them worse?  
    
SECOND MESSENGER  
I’ll waste no words—    
know this—noble Jocasta, our queen, is dead.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
That poor unhappy lady! How did she die?  
    
SECOND MESSENGER  
She killed herself. You did not witness it,  
so you’ll be spared the worst of what went on.  
But from what I recall of what I saw  
you’ll learn how that poor woman suffered.  
She left here frantic and rushed inside,  
the fingers of both hands clenched in her hair.  
She ran through the hall straight to her marriage bed.  
She went in, slamming both doors shut behind her  
and crying out to Laius, who’s been a corpse  
a long time now. She was remembering  
that child of theirs born many years ago—    
the one who killed his father, who left her  
to conceive cursed children with that son.  
She lay moaning beside the bed, where she,                                                      
poor woman, had given birth twice over—    
a husband from a husband, children from a child.                                             
How she died after that I don’t fully know.  
With a scream Oedipus came bursting in.  
He would not let us see her suffering,  
her final pain. We watched him charge around,  
back and forth. As he moved, he kept asking us  
to give him a sword, as he tried to find  
that wife who was no wife—whose mother’s womb  
had given birth to him and to his children.                                                         
As he raved, some immortal power led him on—    
no human in the room came close to him.  
With a dreadful howl, as if someone                                                                                     
had pushed him, he leapt at the double doors,  
bent the bolts by force out of their sockets,  
and burst into the room. Then we saw her.  
She was hanging there, swaying, with twisted cords  
roped round her neck. When Oedipus saw her,  
with a dreadful groan he took her body  
from the noose in which she hung, and then,                                                     
when the poor woman was lying on the ground—    
what happened next was a horrific sight—    
from her clothes he ripped the golden brooches  
she wore as ornaments, raised them high,  
and drove them deep into his eyeballs,                                                                               
crying as he did so: “You will no longer see  
all those atrocious things I suffered,  
the dreadful things I did! No. You have seen  
what you never should have looked upon,  
and what I wished to know you did not see.                                                        
So now and for all future time be dark!”    
With these words he raised his hand and struck,  
not once, but many times, right in the sockets.  
With every blow blood spurted from his eyes  
down on his beard, and not in single drops,  
but showers of dark blood spattering like hail.                                                              
So what these two have done has overwhelmed  
not one alone—this disaster swallows up  
a man and wife together. That old happiness  
they had before in their rich ancestry                                                         
was truly joy, but now lament and ruin,  
death and shame, and all calamities  
which men can name are theirs to keep.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
And has that suffering man found some relief  
to ease his pain?  
    
SECOND MESSENGER  
He shouts at everyone  
to open up the gates and thus reveal  
to all Cadmeians his father’s killer,  
his mother’s . . . but I must not say those words.  
He wants them to cast him out of Thebes,                                                           
so the curse he laid will not come on this house                                       
if he still lives inside. But he is weak  
and needs someone to lead him on his way.  
His agony is more than he can bear—    
as he will show you—for on the palace doors  
the bolts are being pulled back. Soon you will see  
a sight which even a man filled with disgust  
would have to pity.  
    
[OEDIPUS enters through the palace doors]    
    
CHORUS LEADER  
An awful fate for human eyes to witness,  
an appalling sight—the worst I’ve ever seen.  
O you poor man, what madness came on you?                                         
What eternal force pounced on your life                                                              
and, springing further than the longest leap,  
brought you this fearful doom? Alas! Alas!  
You unhappy man! I cannot look at you.  
I want to ask you many things—there’s much  
I wish to learn. You fill me with such horror,  
yet there is so much I must see.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Aaaiiii, aaaiii . . . Alas! Alas!  
How miserable I am . . . such wretchedness . . .  
Where do I go? How can the wings of air  
sweep up my voice? O my destiny,  
how far you have sprung now!  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
To a fearful place from which men turn away,  
a place they hate to look upon.  
    
OEDIPUS  
O the dark horror engulfing me,  
this nameless visitor I can’t resist  
swept here by fair and fatal winds.  
Alas for me! And yet again, alas for me!  
The pain of stabbing brooches pierces me!  
The memory of agonizing shame!                                                                              
    
CHORUS LEADER  
In your distress it’s not astonishing  
you bear a double load of suffering,                                                                                     
a double load of pain.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Ah, my friend,  
so you still care for me, as always,  
and with patience nurse me now I’m blind.  
Alas! Alas! You are not hidden from me—    
I recognize you all too clearly.  
Though I am blind, I know that voice so well.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
You have carried out such dreadful things—    
how could you dare to blind yourself this way?                                               
What god drove you to it?  
    
OEDIPUS  
It was Apollo, friends.  
It was Apollo. He brought on these troubles—                                                               
the awful things I suffer. But the hand  
which stabbed out my eyes was mine alone.  
In my wretched life, why should I have eyes  
when there was nothing sweet for me to see?  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
What you have said is true enough.  
    
OEDIPUS  
What is there for me to see, my friends?  
What can I love? Whose greeting can I hear  
and feel delight? Hurry now, my friends,  
lead me away from Thebes—take me somewhere,  
a man completely lost, utterly accursed,  
the mortal man the gods despise the most.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
Unhappy in your fate and in your mind  
which now knows all. Would I had never known you!  
    
OEDIPUS  
Whoever the man is who freed my feet,  
who released me from that cruel shackle                                                                           
and rescued me from death, may that man die!  
It was a thankless act. Had I perished then,  
I would not have brought such agony                                                   
to myself or to my friends.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
I agree—    
I, too, would have preferred if you had died.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I would not have come to kill my father,  
and men would not see in me the husband  
of the woman who gave birth to me.  
Now I am abandoned by the gods,                                                                           
the son of a corrupted mother,  
conceiving children with the woman  
who gave me my own miserable life.  
If there is some horrific suffering                                                          
worse than all the rest, then it too belongs  
in the fate of Oedipus.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
I do not believe  
what you did to yourself is for the best.  
Better to be dead than alive and blind.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Don’t tell me what I’ve done is not the best.  
And from now on spare me your advice.                                                                  
If I could see, I don’t know how my eyes  
could look at my own father when I come  
to Hades or at my wretched mother.  
Against those two I have committed acts                                             
so vile that even if I hanged myself  
that would not be sufficient punishment.  
Perhaps you think the sight of my own children  
might give me joy? No! Look how they were born!  
They could never bring delight to eyes of mine.  
Nor could the city or its massive walls,  
or the sacred images of its gods.  
I am the most abhorred of men, I,  
the finest man of all those bred in Thebes,                                                          
I have condemned myself, telling everyone                                          
they had to banish for impiety  
the man the gods have now exposed  
as sacrilegious—a son of Laius, too.  
With such polluting stains upon me,  
could I set eyes on you and hold your gaze?  
No. And if I could somehow block my ears  
and kill my hearing, I would not hold back.  
I’d make a dungeon of this wretched body,  
so I would never see or hear again.  
For there is joy in isolated thought,                                                      
completely sealed off from a world of pain.                                                         
O Cithaeron, why did you shelter me?  
Why, when I was handed over to you,  
did you not do away with me at once,  
so I would never then reveal to men  
the nature of my birth? Ah Polybus  
and Corinth, the place men called my home,  
my father’s ancient house, you raised me well—    
so fine to look at, so corrupt inside!  
Now I’ve been exposed as something gross,                                         
contaminated in my origins.  
O you three roads and hidden forest grove,  
you thicket and defile where three paths meet,  
you who swallowed down my father’s blood                                                            
from my own hands, do you remember me,  
what I did there in front of you and then  
what else I did when I came here to Thebes?  
Ah, you marriage rites—you gave birth to me,  
and when I was born, you gave birth again,  
children from the child of that same womb,                                         
creating an incestuous blood family  
of fathers, brothers, children, brides,  
wives and mothers—the most atrocious act  
that human beings commit! But it is wrong  
to talk about what it is wrong to do,  
so in the name of all the gods, act quickly—    
hide me somewhere far from the land of Thebes,                                                    
or slaughter me, or hurl me in the sea,  
where you will never gaze on me again.  
Come, allow yourself to touch a wretched man.                                   
Listen to me, and do not be afraid—    
for this disease infects no one but me.  
    
CHORUS LEADER  
Creon is coming. He is just in time  
to plan and carry out what you propose.  
With you gone he’s the only one still left  
to act as guardian of Thebes.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Alas,  
how will I talk to him? How can I ask him  
to put his trust in me? Not long ago                                                                         
I showed I had no faith in him at all.  
    
[Enter Creon]    
    
CREON  
Oedipus, I have not come here to mock                                              
or blame you for disasters in the past.  
But if you can no longer value human beings,  
at least respect our lord the Sun, whose light  
makes all things grow, and do not put on show  
pollution of this kind in such a public way,  
for neither earth nor light nor sacred rain  
can welcome such a sight.  
    
[Creon speaks to the attending servants]    
    
Take him inside the house  
as quickly as you can. The kindest thing  
would be for members of his family                                                                          
to be the only ones to see and hear him.                                              
    
OEDIPUS  
By all the gods, since you are acting now  
so differently from what I would expect  
and have come here to treat me graciously,  
the very worst of men, do what I ask.  
I will speak for your own benefit, not mine.  
    
CREON  
What are you so keen to get from me?  
    
OEDIPUS  
Cast me out as quickly as you can,  
away from Thebes, to a place where no one,  
no living human being, will cross my path.  
    
CREON  
That is something I could do, of course,                                              
but first I wish to know what the god says  
about what I should do.  
    
OEDIPUS  
But what he said                                               
was all so clear—the man who killed his father  
must be destroyed. And that corrupted man  
is me.  
    
CREON  
Yes, that is what was said. But now,  
with things the way they are, the wisest thing  
is to ascertain quite clearly what to do.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Will you then be making a request  
on my behalf when I am so depraved?  
    
CREON  
I will. For even you must now trust in the gods.                                 
    
OEDIPUS  
Yes, I do. And I have a task for you  
as I make this plea—that woman in the house,  
please bury her as you see fit. You are the one  
to give your own the proper funeral rites.  
But never let my father’s city be condemned  
to have me living here while I still live.                                                                     
Let me make my home up in the mountains  
by Cithaeron, whose fame is now my own.  
When my father and mother were alive,  
they chose it as my special burying place—                                         
and thus, when I die, I shall be following  
the orders of the ones who tried to kill me.  
And yet I know this much—no disease  
nor any other suffering can kill me—    
for I would never have been saved from death  
unless I was to suffer a strange destiny.  
But wherever my fate leads, just let it go.  
As for my two sons, Creon, there’s no need  
for you to care for them on my behalf.  
They are men, and, no matter where they are,  
they’ll always have enough to live on. [^note-121]    
But my two poor daughters have never known  
my dining table placed away from them  
or lacked their father’s presence. They shared  
everything I touched—so it has always been.  
So take care of them for me. But first let me  
feel them with my hands and then I’ll grieve.  
O my lord, you noble heart, let me do that—    
if my hands could touch them it would seem  
as if I were with them when I still could see.  
  
  
[Some SERVANTS lead ANTIGONE and ISMENE out of the palace]    
    
What’s this? By all the gods I hear something—    
is it my two dear children crying . . . ?  
Has Creon taken pity on me  
and sent out the children, my dear treasures?  
Is that what’s happening?  
    
CREON  
Yes. I sent for them.  
I know the joy they’ve always given you—    
the joy which you feel now.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I wish you well.  
And for this act, may the god watch over you  
and treat you better than he treated me.  
Ah, my children, where are you? Come here,  
come into my arms—you are my sisters now—    
feel these hands which turned your father’s eyes,  
once so bright, into what you see now,  
these empty sockets. He was a man who,  
seeing nothing, knowing nothing, fathered you  
with the woman who had given birth to him.  
I weep for you. Although I cannot see,  
I think about your life in days to come,  
the bitter life which men will force on you.  
What citizens will associate with you?                                                 
What feasts will you attend and not come home  
in tears, with no share in the rejoicing?                                                                    
When you’re mature enough for marriage,  
who will be there for you, my children,  
what husband ready to assume the shame  
tainting my children and their children, too?  
What perversion is not manifest in us?  
Your father killed his father, and then ploughed  
his mother’s womb—where he himself was born—    
conceiving you where he, too, was conceived.                                     
Those are the insults they will hurl at you.                                                              
Who, then, will marry you? No one, my children.  
You must wither, barren and unmarried.  
Son of Menoeceus, with both parents gone,  
you alone remain these children’s father.  
Do not let them live as vagrant paupers,  
wandering around unmarried. You are  
a relative of theirs—don’t let them sink  
to lives of desperation like my own.  
Have pity. You see them now at their young age                                 
deprived of everything except a share  
in what you are. Promise me, you noble soul,  
you will extend your hand to them. And you,                                                          
my children, if your minds were now mature,  
there’s so much I could say. But I urge you—    
pray that you may live as best you can  
and lead your destined life more happily  
than your own father.  
    
CREON  
You have grieved enough.  
Now go into the house.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I must obey,  
although that’s not what I desire.  
    
CREON  
In due time                                          
all things will work out for the best.  
    
OEDIPUS  
I will go.  
But you know there are conditions.  
    
CREON  
Tell me.  
Once I hear them, I’ll know what they are.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Send me away to live outside of Thebes.  
    
CREON  
Only the god can give you what you ask.  
    
OEDIPUS  
But I’ve become abhorrent to the gods.  
    
CREON  
Then you should quickly get what you desire.  
    
OEDIPUS  
So you agree?                                                                                                           
    
CREON  
I don’t like to speak  
thoughtlessly and say what I don’t mean.  
    
OEDIPUS  
Come then, lead me off.  
    
CREON  
All right,                                              
but let go of the children.  
    
OEDIPUS  
No, no!  
Do not take them away from me.  
    
CREON  
Don’t try to keep control of everything.  
You have lost the power your life once had.  
    
[CREON, OEDIPUS, ANTIGONE, ISMENE, and ATTENDANTS all enter the palace] [^note-122]  
    
CHORUS  
You residents of Thebes, our native land,  
look on this man, this Oedipus, the one  
who understood that celebrated riddle.  
He was the most powerful of men.  
All citizens who witnessed this man’s wealth  
were envious. Now what a surging tide                                                
of terrible disaster sweeps around him.  
So while we wait to see that final day,  
we cannot call a mortal being happy  
before he’s passed beyond life free from pain.                                                    
    
      
      
[^note-101]: *Cadmus*: legendary founder of Thebes. Hence, the citizens of Thebes were often called children of Cadmus or Cadmeians.  
    
[^note-102]: *Pallas*: Pallas Athena. There were two shrines to her in Thebes. *Ismenus*: A temple to Apollo Ismenios where burnt offerings were the basis for the priest’s divination.  
    
[^note-103]: *cruel singer*: a reference to the Sphinx, a monster with the body of a lion, wings, and the head and torso of a woman. After the death of king Laius, the Sphinx tyrannized Thebes by not letting anyone into or out of the city, unless the person could answer the following riddle: “What walks on four legs in the morning, on two legs at noon, and three legs in the evening?” Those who could not answer were killed and eaten. Oedipus provided the answer (a human being), and thus saved the city. The Sphinx then committed suicide.  
    
[^note-104]: *berries*: a suppliant to Apollo’s shrine characteristically wore such a garland if he received favourable news.  
    
[^note-105]: *Ares*, god of war and killing, was often disapproved of by the major Olympian deities. *Amphitrite*: was a goddess of the sea, married to Poseidon.  
    
[^note-106]: *Lyceian Lord*: a reference to Apollo, god of light.  
    
[^note-107]: *. . . among gods*: Dionysus was also called Bacchus, and Thebes was sometimes called Baccheia (belonging to Bacchus). The *Maenads* are the followers of Dionysus.  
    
[^note-108]: *lustral water*: water purified in a communal religious ritual.  
    
[^note-109]: *Agenor*: founder of the Theban royal family; his son *Cadmus* moved from Sidon in Asia Minor to Greece and founded Thebes. *Polydorus*: son of Cadmus, father of Labdacus, and hence grandfather of Laius.  
    
[^note-110]: *Cithaeron*: the sacred mountain outside Thebes.  
    
[^note-111]: *Zeus’ son*: a reference to Apollo. The *Furies* are the goddesses of blood revenge.  
    
[^note-112]: *Parnassus*: a famous mountain some distance from Thebes, but visible from the city.  
    
[^note-113]: *Polybus*: ruler of Corinth, who raised Oedipus and is thus believed to be his father. The house of Labdacus is the Theban royal family (i.e., Laius, Jocasta, and Creon).  
    
[^note-114]: There is some argument about who speaks which lines in 622-626 of the Greek text. I follow Jebb’s suggestions, ascribing 625 to Creon, to whom it seems clearly to belong (in spite of the manuscripts) and adding a line to indicate Oedipus’ response.  
    
[^note-115]: This part of the choral song makes an important distinction between two forms of self-assertive action: the first breeds self-aggrandizement and greed; the second is necessary for the protection of the state.  
    
[^note-116]: *Isthmus*: The city of Corinth stood on the narrow stretch of land (the Isthmus) connecting the Peloponnese with mainland Greece, a very strategic position.  
    
[^note-117]: *Loxias*: a common name for Apollo.  
    
[^note-118]: *still carry*: the name Oedipus can be construed to mean either “swollen feet” or “knowledge of one’s feet.” Both terms evoke a strongly ironic sense of how Oedipus, for all his fame as a man of knowledge, is ignorant about his origin.  
    
[^note-119]: Cyllene’s king is the god Hermes, who was born on Mount Cyllene; the Bacchanalian god is Dionysus.  
    
[^note-120]: This line refers, not the entire story, but to what Jocasta and Oedipus have just done to themselves.  
    
[^note-121]: Oedipus’ two sons, Eteocles and Polyneices, would probably be fifteen or sixteen years old at this time, not old enough to succeed Oedipus.  
    
[^note-122]: It is not entirely clear from these final lines whether Oedipus now leaves Thebes or not. According to Jebb’s commentary (line 1519), in the traditional story on which Sophocles is relying, Oedipus was involuntarily held at Thebes for some time before the citizens and Creon expelled him from the city. Creon’s lines suggest he is going to wait to hear from the oracle before deciding about Oedipus. However, there is a powerful dramatic logic in having Oedipus stumble off away from the palace. In Book 23 of the *Iliad*, Homer indicates that Oedipus died at Thebes, and there were funeral games held in his honour in that city.  
      
      

