# Ajax {#sophocles_book-4}  
  
  
*This edition is based on the [publicly available](http://records.viu.ca/~johnstoi/sophocles/ajax.pdf) translation by Ian Johnston*  
  
**INTRODUCTORY NOTE**  
When Achilles, the finest of all the warriors in the Achaean army, was killed in the Trojan War, there was a dispute about which warrior should receive the high honour of getting Achilles’ weapons. There were two main claimants, Odysseus and Ajax. The latter was, according to Homer, the best warrior after Achilles. However, as a result of voting among the leading warriors, the weapons were awarded to Odysseus. The action of Sophocles’ play takes place the day after this decision.  
Note that Sophocles calls the Greek forces the Argives, Achaeans, or Danaans, as in Homer, and occasionally the Hellenes (Greeks)  
  
  
**DRAMATIS PERSONAE**  
ATHENA: goddess of war and wisdom  
ODYSSEUS: king of Ithaca, a leader in the Argive forces at Troy  
AJAX: king of Salamis  
CHORUS: sailors from Salamis  
TECMESSA: daughter of the king of Phrygia, concubine of Ajax  
MESSENGER: a soldier  
TEUCER: a Greek warrior, half brother of Ajax  
MENELAUS: one of the commanders of the Argive forces at Troy  
AGAMEMNON: brother of Menelaus, commander of the Greek army  
EURYSACES: young son of Ajax and Tecmessa.  
ATTENDANTS, SERVANTS, SOLDIERS.  
  
[The action takes place during the last year of the Trojan War. The scene is one end of the  
Argive camp beside the sea, outside Ajax’s hut. The hut is a substantial building with main  
doors facing the audience and some side doors. There are steps leading up to a platform  
outside the main doors. It is early in the morning, without very much light yet. ODYSSEUS  
enters slowly, tracking footprints in the sand and trying to look through the partially open  
door into the hut. The goddess ATHENA appears and speaks to ODYSSEUS.]   
  
ATHENA  
 Odysseus, I keep seeing you prowl around,  
 seeking by stealth to gain the upper hand  
 against your enemies. And now, by these huts  
 at one end of the army, where Ajax  
 has his camp beside the ships, for some time  
 I’ve been observing as you track him down,  
 keeping your eyes fixed on his fresh-made trail,  
 to find out whether he’s inside or not. [^note-401]  
 Like a keen-nosed Spartan hunting dog,  
 your path is taking you straight to your goal—   
 the man has just gone in, his head and arms  
 dripping with sweat after the butchery  

 he’s just carried out with his own sword.  
 So you don’t need to peer inside the doors.  
 What are you so eager to discover here?  
 Why not tell me? You could learn the answer  
 from someone who knows.  

ODYSSEUS [looking up but he cannot see Athena]  
 Ah, Athena’s voice, of the gods  
 the one I cherish most. How clear you sound.  
 I can’t see you, but I do hear your words—  
 my mind can grasp their sense, like the bronze call  
 of an Etruscan trumpet. [^note-402]  And you are right.  
 You see me circling around, tracking down  
 that man who hates me, shield-bearing Ajax.  
 I’ve been following his trail a long time now—   

 just him, no one else. During the night  
 he’s done something inconceivable to us,  
 if he’s the one who did it. We’re not sure.  
 We don’t know anything for certain.  
 So I volunteered to find out what’s gone on.  
 We’ve just discovered all our livestock killed—   
 our plunder butchered by some human hand,  
 and with them the men who guard the herd.  
 Everyone blames Ajax for the slaughter.  
 What’s more, an eyewitness who saw him  
 striding by himself across the plain, his sword  

 dripping with fresh blood, informed me of it  
 and told me what he saw. I ran off at once  
 to pick up his trail. I’m following the tracks.  
 But it’s confusing—sometimes I don’t know  
 whose prints they are. So you’ve come just in time,   
 for in the past and in the days to come  
 your hand has been and will remain my guide.  
ATHENA  
 I am aware of that, Odysseus, that’s why  
 for some time I’ve been keen to come to you  
 as a watchman on your hunt.  
ODYSSEUS  
 Well then, dear lady,  
 will what I’m doing here have good results?  
ATHENA  
 I’ll tell you this: Ajax did those killings,  
 as you suspected.  
  
ODYSSEUS  
 Why would he do that?   

 Why turn his hands to such a senseless act?  
ATHENA  
 The weapons—that armour from Achilles—   
 it made him insanely angry. [^note-403]  
ODYSSEUS  
 But then  
 why would he slaughter all the animals?  
ATHENA  
 He thought he was staining both his hands  
 with blood from you.  
ODYSSEUS  
 You mean this was his plan  
 against the Argives?  
ATHENA  
 Yes—and it would have worked,  
 if I had not been paying attention.  
ODYSSEUS  
 How could he have done something so reckless?  
 How could his mind have been so rash?  
ATHENA  
 At night  
 in secret he crept out alone after you.  
ODYSSEUS  
 How close was he? Did he get to his target?   
ATHENA  
 He reached the camp of both commanders—  
 he made it right up to their double gates. [^note-404]  

ODYSSEUS  
 If he was so insanely keen for slaughter,   

 how could he prevent his hands from killing?  
ATHENA  
 I stopped him. I threw down into his eyes  
 an overwhelming sense of murderous joy  
 and turned his rage against the sheep and cattle  
 and those protecting them—the common herd  
 which so far has not been divided up. [^note-405]  
 He launched his attack against those animals  
 and kept on chopping down and slaughtering  
 the ones with horns by slicing through their spines,  
 until they made a circle all around him.  
 At one point he thought he was butchering  
 both sons of Atreus—he had them in his hands. [^note-406]  
 Then he went at some other general  
 and then another. As he charged around  
 in his sick frenzy, I kept encouraging him,  
 kept pushing him into those fatal nets.  
 And then, when he took a rest from killing,  
 he tied up the sheep and cattle still alive  
 and led them home, as if he had captured  
 human prisoners and not just animals.  
 Now he keeps them tied up in his hut  
 and tortures them. I’ll let you see his madness—  
 in plain view here—so you can witness it  
 and then report to all the Argives. Be brave.  
 Do not back off or look upon this man  
 as any threat to you. I will avert his eyes,  
 so he will never see your face.  
[Calling to Ajax inside the hut]  
 You in there—  
 the one who’s tying up his prisoner’s arms—  

 I’m calling you! I’m shouting now for Ajax!  
 Come on out here! Outside the hut! In front!  
ODYSSEUS  
 Athena! What are you doing? Don’t call him!  
 Don’t bring him out here!  
ATHENA  
 Just be patient.  
 Don’t run the risk of being called a coward.  
ODYSSEUS  
 For the gods’ sake, don’t do it! Leave him be!  
 Let him stay inside!  
ATHENA  
 What’s the matter with you?  
 He was just a man before this, wasn’t he?  
ODYSSEUS  
 Yes, and in the past unfriendly to me,  
 and especially now.  
ATHENA  
 But the sweetest laughter  
 comes from mocking enemies. Is that not true?  
ODYSSEUS  
 Still, I’d prefer he stayed inside his hut.  
ATHENA  
 You hesitate to see before your eyes  
 someone in a raving fit?  
ODYSSEUS  
 Yes, I do—  
 if he were fully sane I’d not avoid him  
 or hesitate . . .  
ATHENA  
 But he won’t see you now,  
 not even if you stand beside him.  
ODYSSEUS  
 How will that occur, if he still can see  
 with his own eyes?  
ATHENA  
 His eyes see very well,   
 but I will make them dark.  
ODYSSEUS  
 Well, it is true  
 a god’s work can make all things possible.  
ATHENA  
 Stand here, then, and stay quiet.  
ODYSSEUS  
 I’d better stay,  
 although I’d have preferred to keep my distance.  
ATHENA  
 You in there, Ajax! I’m calling you again!  
 Why show your ally so much disrespect? [^note-407]  
[AJAX enters from the hut. He is carrying a bloody whip with which he has been lashing the  
cattle]  
AJAX  
 Welcome Athena! Welcome child of Zeus!  
 You have given me so much assistance!  
 In gratitude for those I’ve captured  
 I’ll offer you a crown, presents of pure gold.  
ATHENA  
 That’s nobly spoken. But tell me this—  
 did that sword of yours slake itself on blood  
 when you attacked the Argive army?  
AJAX  
 Yes.  
 That I can boast about. I don’t deny it.  
  
ATHENA  
 You went after the two sons of Atreus  
 with that weapon in your fist?  
AJAX  
 Indeed I did.  
 They’ll not dishonour Ajax any more.  
ATHENA  
 So, as I understand you, those men are dead.  
AJAX  
 Yes, dead. Let them rob me of my weapons now!  
ATHENA  
 I see. Well, what about Laertes’ son?  
 As far as you’re concerned, where does he stand?  
 Did he escape you?  
AJAX  
 That damned slimy fox!  
 You ask me where he is?  
ATHENA  
 Yes, I’m asking.  
 I mean that enemy of yours Odysseus.  
AJAX  
 My favourite prisoner, lady, sits inside.  
 I don’t want him to die just yet.  
ATHENA  
 But when?  
 What further actions do you have to do?  
 Or what advantage will you gain by that?  
AJAX  
 Not before he’s tied up to a pillar,  
 the main one holding up the roof in there.  
ATHENA  
 What harm will you inflict on the poor man?  

AJAX  
 I’ll whip his back blood red. Then I’ll kill him.  

ATHENA  
 Don’t abuse the poor man so viciously.  
AJAX  
 You can follow your desires, Athena,  
 in all other things. That I will concede.  
 But this is the penalty he’s going to pay—  
 not something else.  
ATHENA  
 All right, since it pleases you,  
 give that arm of yours some exercise. Don’t stop.  
 Do what you’ve planned.  
AJAX  
 Then I’ll get back to work.  
 And I’ll leave you with this request from me—   
 always stand beside me as my ally  
 the way you did today.  
[AJAX goes back into the hut]  
ATHENA  
 Do you see,  
 Odysseus, how powerful the gods can be?  
 Could you find anyone more sensible  
 than Ajax, a man with more ability  
 to carry out in every situation  
 the most appropriate action?   

ODYSSEUS  
 No one I know.  
 All the same, although he despises me,  
 I pity his misfortune under that yoke  
 of catastrophic madness. It makes me think  
 not just of his fate but my own as well.  
 I see that in our lives we are no more  
 than phantoms, insubstantial shadows.  
ATHENA  
 Well then, now you’ve seen his arrogance,  
 make sure you never speak against the gods,  
 or give yourself ideas of your own grandeur,  
 if your strength of hand or heaped-up riches  
 should outweigh some other man’s. A single day  
 pulls down any human’s scale of fortune  
 or raises it once more. But the gods love  
 men who possess good sense and self-control  
 and despise the ones who are unjust.  
[ATHENA and ODYSSEUS leave. Enter the CHORUS, sailors from Salamis and followers of  
Ajax]  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Son of Telamon, who holds the throne  
 on wave-washed Salamis beside the sea,  
 I rejoice with you when things go well,  
 but when a blow from Zeus or angry words  
 from slanderous Danaans are aimed at you,  
 then I hold back in fear and shake with terror,  
 like the fluttering eye on a feathered dove. [^note-408]  
 I’m like that now. In the night that’s passing,  
 there were noisy rumours thrown against us,  
 against our honour, saying that you went off  
 into that meadow where our horses range  
 and massacred Danaan animals,  
 together with the spoils their spears had captured,  
 prizes which had not yet been allotted.  
 With that bright sword of yours you butchered them.  
 Such slanderous reports Odysseus shapes  
 and whispers into every soldier’s ear.  
 Many men believe him. For he now speaks  
 persuasively about you, and everyone  
 who listens is filled with spite and pleased  
 that you have come to grief, even more  
 than is the man who told them. Throw a spear  
 at some great soul, and you will never miss,  
 but if someone said things like that of me,  
 he’d never be believed. Envy creeps up  
 against the man of wealth and power.  
 And yet without the great, we lesser men  
 are fragile ramparts in our own defence.  

 It’s best for small men to ally themselves  
 with greatness, and for the powerful  
 to be supported by the lesser men.  
 But teaching foolish people such good sense  
 ahead of time is just not possible.  
 So men like this are now denouncing you,  
 and we do not possess sufficient power  
 to deflect these charges, not without you,  
 not without our king. With you out of their sight,  
 they keep on chattering like flocks of birds.  
 But if you unexpectedly appeared,  
 they would be terrified, as if they faced  
 a mighty eagle, and soon would cower there,  
 and hold their tongues in silence.  
CHORUS  
 Was it that goddess Artemis,  
 bull-tending child of Zeus,  
 who drove you on,  
 drove you at the common herd?  
 O mighty Rumour, mother of my shame!  
 Was it perhaps in retribution for a victory  
 where she received no tribute,  
 splendid weapons she was cheated of?  
 Or did some hunter kill a stag  
 and set no gifts aside for her?  
 Or has Enyalios, bronze-plated god of war,  
 with reason to complain about an armed alliance,  
 taken his revenge for such an insult  
 by a devious stratagem at night?  
 For with your own mind, O son of Telamon,  
 you’d never go so far along the path to ruin  
 as to attack the flocks. But nothing can prevent  
 a sickness which the gods implant.  
 I pray that Zeus, that Phoebus Apollo  
 will stave off this catastrophe,  
 this disastrous rumour of the Argives.  
 And if great kings are slandering you now  
 with stories full of lies, or if it is that man  
 born from the worthless line of Sisyphus,  
 do not, my lord, take on the grievous weight  
 of a dishonoured reputation by remaining here,  
 hiding your presence in this hut beside the sea. [^note-409]  
 Up now, get up from where you sit,  
 wherever you’ve been settled for so long  
 in your pause from battle. You are fuelling  
 a fire of disaster blazing up to heaven.  
 Your enemies’ insolence keeps charging on  
 quite fearlessly, whipped up by favouring winds  
 through forest thickets, while every soldier  
 wags his tongue and laughs and jeers.  
 They bring us grief and reinforce our sorrow.  
[Enter TECMESSA]  
TECMESSA  
 You men, shipmates of Ajax, sons of the race  
 of earth-born Erechtheus, all of us  
 who love the distant house of Telamon  
 are in despair. For now our master Ajax,  
 our great and terrifying and forceful king,  
 lies suffering from tempestuous disease. [^note-410]  
CHORUS LEADER  
 What heavy grief has come during the night  
 to change the troubles we had yesterday?  
 Daughter of the Phrygian Teleutas,  
 speak to us—though bold Ajax won you  
 fighting with his spear, he still maintains  
 a strong affection for you, so you may know  
 and offer us an answer.  
TECMESSA  
 How can I tell  
 a story much too terrifying for words?  

 You will hear of suffering as harsh as death.  
 Last night madness seized our glorious Ajax,  
 and now he has been totally disgraced.  
 You can see everything inside his hut,  
 the blood-soaked butchered victims who were killed  
 as sacrifices at his very hands.  
CHORUS  
 The news you tell us of our fiery king  
 we cannot bear, and yet there’s no escape.  
 It’s what the powerful Danaans say,  
 what their great story-telling spreads around.  
 O, how I fear what’s coming next. This man  
 is going to die—and in full public view—  
 with a black sword in those mad hands of his  
 he massacred the herd and herdsmen, too,  
 the ones who ride to guard our animals.  
TECMESSA  
 Alas! From those fields he came to me  
 right after that, leading his captive beasts.  
 On the floor in there he slit some of their throats,  
 struck others in the ribs, tore them apart.  
 He grabbed two rams—the legs on both were white—  
 cut off the head on one and sliced its tongue,  
 right at the tip, then threw the parts away,  
 and lashed the other upright on the pillar.  
 He seized a thick strap from a horse’s harness  
 and flogged it with a whistling double lash.  
 He was cursing with an awful violence,  
 not human words—ones a god had taught him.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 The time has come for us to hide our heads  
 and steal away on foot—or take our seats,  
 each man at his swift oar, and let our ship  
 sail out on her seaworthy way. Those threats  
 our two commanders, sons of Atreus,  
 keep hurling at us are so serious,  
 I am afraid of savage death by stoning,  
 sharing the suffering of the man in there,  
 struck down with him now in the grip of fate,  
 his own inexorable doom.  
TECMESSA  
 No, no.  
 He is no longer like that. He’s grown calm.  
 Like a sharp south wind that rushes past  
 without a lightning flash, he’s easing off.  
 Now he’s sane again, but in new agonies.  
 To look at self-inflicted suffering  

 when no one else played any part in it  
 brings on great anguish.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 If he’s no longer mad,  
 I’m confident that things may be all right.  
 For when disaster has already passed  
 it doesn’t have as much significance.  
TECMESSA  
 But if you had the choice of causing grief  
 to your own friends while feeling good yourself  
 or of grieving too, a suffering man  
 among a common sorrow, which would you choose?  
CHORUS LEADER  
 The double grieving, lady, is far worse.  
TECMESSA  
 So at this moment we, although not sick,  
 are facing disaster.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 What does that mean?  
 I don’t understand what you are saying.  

TECMESSA  
 That man in there, when he was still so ill,   
 enjoyed himself while savage fantasies  
 held him in their grip, but we were sane,  
 and, since he was one of us, we suffered.  
 But now there is a pause in his disease,  
 he can recuperate and understand  
 the full extremity of bitter grief,  
 yet everything for us remains the same—  
 our anguish is no milder than before.  

 This is surely not a single sorrow,  
 but a double grief?  
CHORUS LEADER  
 I think that’s true.  
 I fear a blow sent from a god has struck him.  
 How else could this take place, if his spirit  
 is no more hopeful now that he’s been cured  

 than when he was sick?  
TECMESSA  
 That’s how things stand.  
 You must see that.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 How did his illness start?  
 How did this trouble first swoop down on him?  
 Since we share your grief, tell us what happened.  
TECMESSA  
 You are all involved in this, and so you’ll hear  
 the entire story. At some point in the night,  
 when the evening torches had stopped burning,   
 Ajax took up his two-edged sword, resolved  
 to set off on a senseless expedition.  
 I challenged him and said, “What are you doing?  
 Ajax, why are you going out like this?  
 There’s been no summons, no messenger,  
 nor any trumpet call. All the army  

 is now sleeping.” His reply to me was brief,  
 that old refrain, “Woman, the finest thing  
 that females do is hold their tongues.” So I,  
 taking my cue from that, did not respond,   
 and he charged out alone. I cannot say  
 what went on out there, but he came back  
 and took his chained-up prisoners inside,  
 all linked together—bulls and herding dogs  
 and captured sheep. He cut the heads off some.  
 He twisted back the skulls of other beasts  
 and cut their throats or chopped their spines.  
 Others, whom he kept tied up, he tortured,  
 as if they were human beings, even though  

 it was only beasts he was attacking.  
 At last, he charged out through the doorway  

 and forced out some words of conversation  
 with a shadow. Sometimes he’d talk about  
 the sons of Atreus, at other times  
 about Odysseus, with manic laughter  
 at how by going out he had avenged  
 all their arrogance in full. After that,  
 he rushed back in the hut again and there  
 he gradually regained his sense somehow,  
 though not without an effort. Once he saw  
 his room filled up with that deluded slaughter,  
 he struck his head and howled. Then he collapsed,  
 a ruined man among so many ruins,  
 carcasses of butchered sheep. He sat there,  
 fists gripping his hair with nails clenched tight.  

 For a long time he remained quite silent.  
 Then he made some dreadful threats against me  
 if I would not tell him every detail  
 of what had taken place. He questioned me—  
 What on earth had he become involved with?   
 My friends, I was afraid. So I told him  
 everything that had gone on, all the things  
 I knew were true. He at once began to groan,  
 doleful sounds I’d never heard from him before.  
 He’s always claimed that wailing cries like that  
 were only fit for gloomy men and cowards.  

 He used to grieve, but never wail aloud—  
 just a deep moan, like from a lowing bull.  
 But now, overwhelmed by his misfortune,  
 he takes no food, no drink, sprawled in silence  
 where he fell down among dead animals  
 his own sword killed. It seems clear enough  
 he will do something bad. The words he speaks  
 and his laments show that intent somehow.  
 My friends, you should come in and help him,  
 if that’s possible. That’s why I came out here.  
 For words from friends can cure a man like him.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Tecmessa, daughter of Teleutas,  
 what you’ve described to us about the man  
 being driven mad with sorrow—that’s dreadful.  
AJAX [crying out from inside the hut]  
 Aaaiiii . . . Alas for me!  

TECMESSA  
 It looks as if his fit could soon be worse.  
 Did you not hear that loud cry from Ajax?  
AJAX  
 Aaaiiii! . . . Alas!  
CHORUS LEADER  
 I think the man is sick or still suffering  
 the effects of that disease he had before—  
 they’re all around him where he sits.  
AJAX  
 My child! My son!  
TECMESSA  
 How miserable I feel!   

 Eurysaces, he’s calling you. But why?  
 What does he have in mind? Where are you?   
 I’m overwhelmed.  
AJAX  
 I call on Teucer!  
 Where is Teucer? Will that fighting raid he’s on  
 keep going forever, with me dying here? [^note-411]  

CHORUS LEADER  
 I think the man may have his wits again.  
 Open the door. Perhaps when he sees me  
 he’ll quickly feel a sense of self-respect.  
TECMESSA [opening the door of the hut]  
 There. It’s open. Now you can take a look  
 at what he’s done and see the state he’s in.  
[AJAX is revealed sitting among the dead animals]  
  
 Ah, my cherished sailors, of all my friends  
 the only ones who still observe true loyalty.  
 You see how great a wave has just rolled over me,  
 a crashing surge lashed on by murderous winds.  

CHORUS LEADER [to Tecmessa]  
 It looks as if what you told us is true—  
 his condition clearly shows his madness.  
AJAX  
 Ah, you race of master mariners,  
 who crossed the sea and with your oars sped out  
 across the salty ocean, I see in you,  
 and in you alone, the one support  

 in my despair. Come, help me kill myself.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 No more of that! Speak words of hope.  
 Don’t seek to cure one bad thing with another  
 or make this mad disaster any worse.  
AJAX  
 Do you see how this bold and valiant heart,  
 this warrior so fearless in those wars  
 against his enemies, has turned his hands,  
 these awesome hands, against tame animals?  
 Ah, the mockery! How I have been abused!  
TECMESSA  
 I beg you, my lord Ajax, don’t say that.  
AJAX  
 Just go away. Why not turn your feet around  
 and wander off somewhere? Aaaaiiii . . . .  

CHORUS LEADER  
 By the gods, concede. Use your common sense.  
AJAX  
 It’s my bad luck I let slip from my grasp  
 those criminals deserving punishment.  
 Instead I went at bulls with twisted horns,  
 fine herds of goats, and made their dark blood flow.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Why lament those deeds which have been done  
 and cannot be recalled? Such final acts  
 will never be anything but what they are.  

AJAX  
 O you who keeps prying into everything,  
 you nasty instrument for every crime, [[[[[]]]]380]  
 Odysseus, the filthiest degenerate  
 in all the army, you must be laughing now,  
 taking great delight in this.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Divine will  
 determines if each man laughs and cries.  
AJAX  
 But still,  
 I’d like to face him, though I’m injured. Ahhhh . . . .  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Don’t make boasts like that. Do you not see  
 the catastrophe you face?  
AJAX  
 O Zeus,  
 you ancestral father of my father,  
 if only I could die after I had killed  
 that wheedling scoundrel enemy of mine  
 and those twin-reigning kings. [^note-412]  
TECMESSA  
 When you make that prayer,  
 pray also that I die as well. With you gone,  
 why should I continue living?  
AJAX  
 O darkness, now my daylight,  
 O gloom of Erebus, for me  
 the brightest light there is,  
 take me, take me now  
 to live with you. [^note-413]  
Take me,  
 a man no longer worthy to seek help  
 from families of gods or men,  
 those creatures of a day.  
 For Zeus’ daughter, brave Athena,  
 abuses and destroys me.  
 Where can one escape?  
 Where could I go and rest?  
 If my past fame has been cut down,  
 along with these dead beasts beside me,  
 then, my friends, if I now seek  
 a madman’s triumphs, all the army,  
 with repeated blows from their own swords  
 will cut me down as well.  
TECMESSA  
 How hard it is for me to hear this man,  
 this worthy man, say things he’d never say  
 before this happened!  
AJAX  
 O you paths of the resounding sea!  
 You tidal caves and coastal pastures,  
 for a long time now, for far too long,  
 you have detained me here in Troy.  
 But that you will no longer do, no,  
 not while I am breathing still.  
 Let men of sense be sure of that.  
 O you streams of the Scamander,  
 my neighbour, so friendly to the Argives,  
 you no longer will be seeing Ajax,  
 a man whose equal as a warrior—  
 and I can make this boast—  
 Troy never saw arriving here from Greece.  
 But now I lie among this heap, dishonoured. [^note-414]  
CHORUS LEADER  
 I don’t have the strength to stop your words  
 or to let you go on saying such things—  
 you’ve fallen into such calamity.  
AJAX  
 Alas! Who would ever think my name  
 would suit my troubles so poetically? [^note-415]  
  
For I could well cry out two or three times  
 “Alas for Ajax!”—that shows the magnitude  
 of the disaster I am going through.  
 I am the man whose father’s excellence  
 won supreme respect from all the army.  
 He took the fairest prize and carried home  
 every glory from the land of Ida. [^note-416]  
 I am his son, who journeyed after him  
 to this same land of Troy. I’m just as strong,  
 with the work of my own hands I have attained  
 achievements just as great, but, as you see,  
 these Argive insults have quite ruined me.  
 And yet I think I can affirm this much—  
 had Achilles lived and been about to judge  
 the man who should receive his weapons,  
 the prize for being the finest man in war,  
 no soldier would have put his hand on them  
 before I did. But now the sons of Atreus  
 have dealt them to a fellow whose spirit  
 will stoop to anything, and pushed aside  
 all those triumphant victories of Ajax.  
 If with my distorted mind and eyes,  
 I had not abandoned what I planned,  
 they would not have had what’s mine by right  
 put to the vote against another man. [^note-417]  
 But then that goddess with the glaring eyes,  
 implacable Athena, Zeus’ daughter,  
 threw me over at the very instant  
 I was steadying my hand against them.  
 She hurled in me a frenzied sickness,  
 so blood from grazing beasts would stain my hands,  
 and those men now can laugh at their escape,  
 something I did not want. But when a god  
 commits an injury, the unworthy man  
 escapes someone more powerful. And now,  
 what do I do, when I am obviously  
 hated by the gods, when the Greek army  
 despises me, and everyone in Troy  
 and on the plain holds me an enemy?  
 Should I give up my station in the fleet,   

 leaving the sons of Atreus alone,  
 and sail for home across the Aegean Sea?  
 How could I face my father, Telamon,  
 when I arrive back there? How could he bear  
 to see me showing up with nothing,  
 without the prize for highest excellence  
 with which he won his own great crown of fame?   
 That’s not a thing I could endure to do.  
 Well, then, should I charge out there on my own  
 against the Trojan wall, a lone attack,  
 fight single combats, do something valiant,  
 and then at last be killed? But that would please  
 the sons of Atreus. It must not happen.  

 I must seek out some act which will reveal  
 to my old father how, at least by nature,  
 his own son has not become a coward.  
 It is dishonourable for any man  
 to crave a lengthy life, once he discovers  
 the troubles he is in will never change.  
 What joy is there for him when every day  
 just follows on another, pulling him away  
 or pushing him toward death? I would not pay  
 for any sort of mortal man who’s warmed  
 by futile hopes. A man of noble birth  
 lives on with honour, or he dies in glory.  
 Now you’ve heard everything I have to say.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 No one will ever claim that you, Ajax,   
 have said a word that’s illegitimate,  
 for what you say is born in your own heart.  
 But you should stop. Get rid of thoughts like these.  
 Let friends overrule what you’re suggesting.  
TECMESSA  
 O my lord Ajax, for human beings  
 the worst of evils is what they endure  
 when they’re compelled to. Consider me.  
 I was the daughter of a free-born father,  

 a wealthy man, if anyone in Phrygia  
 could be accounted rich. Now I’m a slave,   
 a circumstance the gods somehow made happen—  
 yes, the gods and especially your strong limbs.  

 And thus, since I have come into your bed,  
 I want the best for you. So I beg you,  
 by Zeus who guards our home, by that bed  
 where you had sex with me, do not leave me  
 to the savage insults of your enemies.  
 Do not abandon me to some strange hand.  
 For if you die and leave me all alone,  
 that day you may be sure the Argive men  
 will take me by force, as well as your own son.  
 We will then both lead the lives of slaves.  
 One of our lords will speak these biting words,   
 shooting insults at me, “Look here at this,  
 a bed mate of Ajax, the strongest man  
 in all our army. What menial chores she does!  
 How she’s changed from such an enviable state!”
 Men will talk that way, and then my fate  
 will wear me down. Those shameful words will stain  
 you and your family. Respect your father,   
 whom you will leave a miserable old man.  
 Respect your mother, too, who shares his years.  
 She keeps begging the gods that you’re alive,  
 that you’ll return back home. And, my lord,  
 have pity for your son. For if you die,   
 consider how, whenever that day comes,  
 both he and I will face desolation.  
 He will lack the nurturing a young lad needs  
 if you leave and he becomes an orphan,  
 in the care of people who are not friends  
 or from his family. And I have nothing  
 I can look to except you. It was you  
 who killed my homeland for me with your spear.  
 My mother and my father were destroyed  
 by a different fate which led them down  
 to make their home in Hades after death. [^note-418]  
 What country could I have except with you?  
 What wealth? My safety, all security,  
 that rests with you. So remember me as well.  

 A genuine man should cherish memory,   
 if he gets pleasure still from anything.  
 Kindness always engenders gratitude.  
 A man who gives up his good memories  
 will no longer be a noble, worthy man.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Ajax, I wish that pity touched your heart,  
 as it does mine. Then you’d approve her words.  
AJAX  
 So far as I’m concerned, she’ll win approval  
 only if she keeps being obedient  
 and carries out my orders properly.  
TECMESSA  
 Yes, beloved Ajax, I will obey  
 in everything.  
AJAX  
 Then bring me my son,   

 so I may see him.  
TECMESSA  
 I sent him away,  
 out of my care. I was so terrified.  
AJAX  
 Afraid because I was in trouble?  
 What do you mean?  
TECMESSA  
 Yes, that’s it. I feared  
 that the unlucky boy might bother you  
 and then somehow get killed.  
AJAX  
 Yes, such a thing  
 the god who watches me would think fitting.  
TECMESSA  
 At least I took a suitable precaution  
 to stop that happening.  

AJAX  
 I approve of that.  
 The steps you took were quite correct.  
TECMESSA  
 And so,  
 as things are now, how can I best serve you?  
AJAX  
 Let me talk to him, see him face to face.  
TECMESSA  
 Yes. He’s close by, with servants watching him.  
AJAX  
 Why then this delay? Why is he not here?   

TECMESSA [calling to the side]  
 My son, your father is calling for you.  
 Whichever of you servants has his hand,  
 bring the boy out here.  
AJAX  
 Is he coming, the one you called?  
 Or did he not hear?  
TECMESSA  
 The servant’s on his way.  
 He’s bringing Eurysaces with him.  
[Enter the SERVANT leading EURYSACES]  
AJAX  
 Lift him up. Hand the boy to me up here.  
 He’ll have no fear of fresh-spilt blood, no,  
 not if he’s a true-bred son of mine  
 who shares his father’s nature. It is time  
 he was broken in to that harsh code  
 his father follows and his nature shaped  
 to something like my own. O my boy,   

 may you have better fortunes than your father,  
 although remain like him in other ways,  
 for then you’ll never be dishonoured.  
 Now I envy you, and with good reason—  

 for you have no idea of any troubles.  
 The sweetest life comes when one senses nothing—  
 to lack all feeling is a painless evil—  
 until you learn what joy and sorrow mean.  
 Once you reach that stage, you must reveal  
 the kind of man you are, your ancestry,  
 to those who were your father’s enemies.  
 Meanwhile, you should feed on gentle breezes,  
 fostering your young life so as to bring  
 your mother joy. I know that no Achaean  

 will go at you with insults and contempt,  
 even when I’m gone. For I am leaving Teucer  
 here with you as guardian of your gates.  
 He will not falter in his care for you,  
 although he now is busy far away,  
 chasing his enemies. But my warriors,  
 my people of the sea, I charge you now  
 with the same joyful duty I give Teucer.  
 Report to him what I have ordered here—   
 he is to take this boy back to my home,  
 show him to Telamon and Eriboea,  
 my mother, so he may always comfort them  

 in their old age, until the time they reach  
 the yawning caverns of the gods below.  
 And none of those who judge our competitions  
 nor the man who ruined me will offer  
 my weapons as a prize for the Achaeans.  
 No, my son, for my sake you will have to take  
 that broad shield from which you get your name. [^note-419]  
 Hold it up high. Shift it by its well-stitched grip,  
 my impenetrable seven-layered shield.  
 My other weapons you will bury with me.  
 Come, take the boy, and quickly. Close the hut.  
 And don’t keep on weeping here in front.  
 How these women really love their wailing!   

 Quick now, close up the hut. A skilful healer  
 does not howl incantations when a wound  
 is crying for the knife.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 When I hear  

 
  
 that you’re in such a rush, I get afraid.  
 The sharp edge on your tongue brings me no joy.  
TECMESSA  
 O lord Ajax, what are you going to do?  
AJAX  
 Don’t keep on asking me! No more questions!  
 The best thing now is self-restraint.  
TECMESSA  
 But I’m desperate!  
 By the gods, by your own son, I beg you—  
 do not become a man who now betrays us!  
AJAX  
 You pester me too much. Do you not see  
 that I no longer owe the gods my service?   

TECMESSA  
 You must not utter such impieties.  
AJAX  
 Speak to those who listen.  
TECMESSA  
 You will not hear me?   
AJAX  
 You have already chatted far too much.  
TECMESSA  
 Yes, my lord, because I’m so afraid.  
AJAX [to the servants]  
 Shut the doors. Do it now!  
TECMESSA  
 By all the gods, concede!  
AJAX  
 It looks as though you’re thinking like a fool,  
 if, at this late date, you still believe  
 that what you teach will shape my character.  

[The SERVANTS close the main door of the hut, leaving AJAX inside. TECMESSA, EURYSACES,  
and the SERVANTS go into the hut through the side door from which Eurysaces  
emerged earlier]  
CHORUS  
 O splendid Salamis,  
 you, I know, lie in the sea,  
 whose waves beat on your happy shores,  
 a famous place among all men forever.  
 I have been held back a long time here  

 in misery, for countless months  
 still camped out in the fields of Ida,  
 consumed by time and my anxiety,  
 expecting to complete my journey  
 to implacably destructive Hades.  
 And now my troubles multiply,  
 a situation hard to remedy,  
 for I must wrestle now with Ajax,   

 share my life with that insanity  
 sent from the gods. Alas for me!  
 Once, long ago, you sent him out  
 filled with the frenzied power of war.  
 But now his spirit feeds in isolation,  
 and his friends acquire from him  
 a heavy sorrow. His earlier deeds,  
 those acts of highest excellence,  
 have fallen, fallen where he has no friends,  
 among the wretched hostile sons of Atreus.  

 The years have changed his mother’s hair to white,   
 and given her old age for company.  
 When she learns of his disease,  
 that maddening infection of his mind,  
 she’ll start to wail forth her laments.  
 She will not chant out melodies  
 sung by the plaintive nightingale.  
 No. In her mood of desolation  

 the sharp-toned music of her grief  
 will scream abroad her anguish.  
 Her beating hands will thud down on her breasts,   
 and she’ll keep tearing out her old gray hair.  

 A man brain sick with mad delusions  
 is better off concealed in Hades,  
 a man who by his ancestry  
 is ranked the best of the Achaeans,  
 who have endured so much. But now,  
 no longer following his inbred character,  
 he wanders far beyond himself.  

 O you unhappy father Telamon,  
 you have yet to hear the heavy curse  
 laid on your son, a curse which up to now  
 has never played a part in any life  
 nurtured by the sons of Aeacus.  
  
[Enter AJAX through the main doors of the hut with a sword. TECMESSA enters after him.]  
AJAX  
 The long succession of the countless years  
 reveals what’s hidden, then hides it once again,  
 and there is nothing we should not anticipate.  
 The solemn oath and the most stubborn heart  
 are overcome. In this way, even I,   

 who used to be so marvellously strong,  
 like tempered iron, felt my sharp edge dissolve  
 at what this woman said. I now feel pity  
 leaving her a widow and my son an orphan  
 among my enemies. And so I’ll go  
 to the bathing waters by the sea shore  
 and wash off my defilement. I will deflect  
 the weighty anger of the goddess there.  
 When I leave, I’ll find some isolated place  
 and then inter my sword, of all my weapons  
 the one I most despise. I’ll dig the earth  
 where no one else will see. Then let Night  
 and Hades keep it there below the ground.  

 For ever since I’ve held it in my grip,  
 this gift from Hector, my greatest enemy,  
 I’ve won no prizes from the Argives. [^note-420]  
 That old human saying is true: gifts men get  
 from enemies—they are no gifts at all  
 and bring them no advantages. And so,  
 from this day forward I shall understand  
 how to revere the gods. And I will learn  
 how to respect the sons of Atreus.  
 They are our rulers, so we must obey.  
 Why not? Things of the greatest power and awe  
 give way to privileged authorities.  

 Snow-footed Winter yields to fruitful Summer,  
 and Night’s dark vault withdraws the moment Day  
 with her white-footed horses fires up the sky;  
 the blasts of fearful Winds at last bring rest  
 which calms the groaning seas. All-powerful Sleep  
 lets go the one he holds tied up in chains;  
 his grasp does not go on forever. As for us,   
 how can we mortals not learn self-control?  
 I, at least, am only now discovering  
 that we should hate our enemies as much  
 as suits a man who will become a friend.  

 And when I help a friend, then I will give  
 only what is due a man who’ll not remain  
 a friend forever. For common mortals  
 see that the shelter comradeship affords  
 is treacherous. Thus, my situation  
 will turn out for the best. And so, woman,   
 go inside now. Keep praying to the gods  
 my heart’s desires will reach fulfilment  
 and be carried out to their conclusion.  
[TECMESSA return into the hut through the side door. AJAX turns to address the CHORUS]  
AJAX  
 My comrades, you, too, honour this request.  
 Tell Teucer, when he comes, to care for me  
 and also to protect your interests.  
 I am now going where I have to go.  

 As for you, carry out what I have said,  
 and very soon, perhaps, you will find out  
 that, though I’m suffering now, I am at peace.  
[AJAX leaves, heading for the sea shore.]  
CHORUS  
 I feel a sudden thrill of passionate delight,  
 which makes me soar aloft with happiness  
 and cry with joy to Pan—  
 O Pan, Pan—  

 appear to us, sea rover—  
 come down from your stony ridge  
 on snow-beat Mount Cyllene,  
 you dancing master of the gods—  
 come, O king,  
 begin your self-taught dancing steps  
 from Mysia and Cnossos,   

 for what I want now is to dance.  
 And may Apollo, lord of Delos,  
 race across the Icarian Sea  
 and manifest himself to me,  
 show his benevolence in everything.  
 From our eyes Ares has removed  
 those terrifying agonies.  
 What joy! O joy!  
 For now, O Zeus, now  
 the dazzling light of brighter days  
 can come to our swift ships  
 which speed across the seas,   

 for Ajax is free of pain once more  
 and, in a transformed state of mind,  
 has carried out appropriate sacrifice  
 to all the gods in full, showing them  
 due reverence and strictly following  
 our most important laws.  
 The power of time extinguishes all things,   
 so I can’t say that anything  
 lies beyond all expectation—  
since, in contrast to what we were waiting for,  
 now Ajax’s mind has changed again  
 away from actions done in anger  
 and his great fight with Atreus’ sons.  
[Enter a MESSENGER]  
MESSENGER  
 Friends, the first thing I have to report is this—  
 Teucer has just come from the Mysian heights.  

 He’s now in the middle of our line of ships,  
 in the generals’ camp. All the Argives  
 are shouting insults at him, all at once.  
 They saw him coming and, as he approached,  
 surrounded him, hurling accusations 

 from all directions—everyone joined in—  
 calling him the brother of that maniac  
 who had conspired against the army  
 and saying he could not escape his death—  
 their stones would cut him down completely.  
 Things reached the point where men had pulled their swords  
 out of their scabbards and held them fully drawn.  
 Then, as the fight was getting out of hand,  
 some elders intervened. Their words stopped it.  
 But where can I find Ajax to tell him this?  
 I must provide our king a full report.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 He’s not inside. He has just gone away,  
 with new intentions yoked to his changed mood.  
MESSENGER  
 O no! No! Then the man who sent me here  
 did so too late, or I have been too slow.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 What’s so urgent? What’s been overlooked?   

MESSENGER  
 Teucer said that Ajax had to stay inside  
 and not leave his hut until he gets here.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Well, as I told you, Ajax has gone off.  
 He intends to follow now what’s best for him,  
 to cleanse away his anger at the gods.  
MESSENGER  
 Your words reveal your complete foolishness,  
 if what Calchas prophesies has any merit.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 What do you mean? What information  
 do you have about what’s happening here?  
MESSENGER  
 Well I was there, so I know this much—  
 I witnessed it. Calchas left the leaders  
 sitting in their royal council circle,  

 moving off from the sons of Atreus.  

 In a friendly gesture he placed his right hand  
 in Teucer’s palm. Then he spoke to him,  
 giving him strict orders to use every means  
 to keep Ajax in his hut while this day lasts  
 and to prevent him moving anywhere  
 if he ever wished to see him still alive.  
 For divine Athena’s rage would whip Ajax  
 only for that day. That’s what Calchas said.  
 Then the prophet added, “Those living things  
 which become too large and thus unwieldy  
 fall into harsh disasters from the gods—  
 the sort of man who, born from human stock,   

 forgets and thinks beyond his mortal state.  
 Take Ajax. As soon as he set out from home,  
 he revealed his folly, though his father  
 had passed on good advice. For Telamon  
 commanded him, ‘My son, with that spear of yours  
 you must seek victory, but always fight  
 with some god at your side.’ But then Ajax,  
 in a lofty boast, thoughtlessly replied,  
 ‘Father, with god’s help even a worthless man  
 can be victorious. But I believe  
 I’ll win glory on my own without them.’
 Such was his arrogance. Another time,   

 with divine Athena, as she was rousing him  
 and telling him to turn his deadly hands  
 against the enemy, he answered her  
 with a fearful and sacrilegious speech,   
 ‘Lady, stand there with the other Argives.  
 The fight will never break the line through Ajax.’
 It was with words like these that he provoked  
 the unremitting anger of the goddess,  
 because he does not think as humans should.  
 But if he remains alive all day today,  
 with god’s help we might be his saviours.”
 That’s what Calchas said. From where he sat  

 Teucer sent me off at once with orders  
 which you were meant to follow. If we fail,   
 Ajax is done for—that is, if Calchas  
 has any skill in prophecy.  
CHORUS LEADER [calling into the side door of the hut]  
 Tecmessa,  

 unfortunate lady born for sorrow,  
 come out and see this man. Hear his news.  
 The razor’s slicing closer. I feel its pain.  
[Enter TECMESSA through the side door of the hut]  
TECMESSA  
 Why are you making me come out once more  
 and leave the chair where I was getting  
 some relief from these unending troubles?  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Listen to this man—he’s come with news  
 about what’s happening with Ajax,   
 and it’s disturbing.  
TECMESSA  
 O no! You there,  
 tell me what you have to say. Does this mean  
 we’re finished?  
MESSENGER  
 I have no idea  
 how things stand with you. As for Ajax,  
 if he is not inside, then I’ve lost hope.  
TECMESSA  
 He’s gone away. So I’m in agony  
 about just what you mean.  
MESSENGER  
 Teucer gave orders  
 that you keep Ajax safely in his hut  
 and do not let him leave all by himself.  
TECMESSA  
 But where is Teucer? Why did he say that?   
MESSENGER  
 He has only just returned. He suspects  
 if Ajax goes somewhere he’ll be destroyed.  
TECMESSA  
 That’s horrible! What man told him this?   

MESSENGER  
 Thestor’s son, the prophet, whose words proclaimed  
 this very day would bring life or death for Ajax.  
TECMESSA  
 O my friends, protect me from this destiny!  
 Some of you, get Teucer here more quickly,  
 while others go off to the western cove  
 and to the east, as well, to investigate—  
 find out where Ajax went, when he set off  
 on that ill-fated path. For now I know  
 I have, in fact, been totally deceived,  
 and Ajax has finally cast away  
 all that affection he once had for me.  
 Alas, my son, what am I going to do?  
 I can’t stay idle. So I’ll go out there,   
 as far as I have strength to go. Let’s leave—  
 and hurry! This is no time to sit around,  
 if we want to save a man who’s eager  
 for destruction.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 I’m prepared to help,   
 not just with words, as I will demonstrate.  
 If we move fast, we can do this quickly.  
[They all exit in various directions, leaving the stage empty. The scene now changes to a deserted  
part of the seashore. AJAX enters, carrying his sword, which he sets upright in the  
sand, with the blade sticking upward.]  
AJAX  
 The sacrificial killer is in place,  
 so it will now cut most effectively.  
 If a man had time, he might reflect on this.  
 It is a gift from Hector, a warrior  
 who was a friend most hateful to me,  
 the one I looked on as my greatest foe. [^note-421]  
 Then, this sword is firmly set in Trojan soil,  
 land of my enemy, freshly whetted  
 on the iron-eating sharpening stone.  

 And I have fixed it in the ground with care,  
 so it will kill me quickly and be kind.  
 Thus, we are well prepared. So, O Zeus,  
 in this situation, be the first to help,  
 as is appropriate. I’m not asking you  
 to give me a grand prize, but for my sake  
 send a messenger to carry this bad news  
 to Teucer, so he may be the first  
 to raise me, once I’ve fallen on the sword  
 and covered it with fresh-spilt blood. Don’t let  
 the first to spot me be some enemy,  
 who’ll throw me out, exposed as carrion food  

 for dogs and birds. I appeal to you, O Zeus.  
 Grant me this much. I also call on Hermes,  
 guide to the world below, to let me sleep  
 without convulsions, when by one quick leap  
 I break my bones apart on this sharp blade.  
 And I summon those immortal maidens  
 to my aid, those who always see all things  
 of human suffering, the dread, far-striding Furies,  
 to witness how, in my wretchedness,  
 the sons of Atreus worked my destruction.  
 May they seize on them and destroy them, too,  
 with deaths as vile as their disgusting selves.  

 Just as they see me killed by my own hand,  
 so let them perish, killed by their own kindred,  
 the children they love most. Come, you Furies,  
 you swift punishers, devour the army,  
 all of them, sparing no one. And you, Helios,   
 whose chariot wheels climb that steep path to heaven,  
 when you look down over my father’s land,  
 pull back those reins of yours, which flash with gold,  
 then tell the story of my miseries,  
 my destiny, to my old father  
 and to the unhappy one who nursed me.  
 That poor lady, when she hears this news,   

 will, I think, sing out a huge lamenting dirge  
 throughout the city. But for me to weep  
 is useless. It’s time to start the final act.  
 O Death, Death, come now and watch in person.  
 Yet I’ll be seeing you on the other side,  
 and there we can converse. And so to you,  
 the radiant light of this bright shining day,  
 I make my final call, and to the Sun—  

 I’ll never see that chariot any more.  
 O light, O sacred land of Salamis,  
 my home, my father’s sturdy hearth,   

 and glorious Athens, whose race was bred  
 related to my own—and you rivers,   
 you streams, you plains of Troy, I call on you.  
 Farewell, you who have nurtured me—to you  
 Ajax now speaks his final words. The rest  
 I’ll say to those below in Hades.  
[Ajax falls on his sword. Enter the CHORUS in two separate groups from two different directions.  
Each has a separate leader. They do not see Ajax’s body until Tecmessa finds it.] [^note-422]  
  
CHORAL GROUP 1  
 We work and work,  
 and that brings on more work.  
 Where have I not walked? Where?  
 No place where I have searched  
 has revealed to me where Ajax is.  
 What’s that? Listen! I heard a noise.  
CHORAL GROUP 2 LEADER  
 It’s us—the crew that shares the ships with you.  
CHORAL GROUP 1 LEADER  
 What can you report?  
CHORAL GROUP 2 LEADER:
 We’ve searched everywhere  
 on the west side of the ships.  
CHORAL GROUP 1 LEADER  
 Did you come up with anything?  
CHORAL GROUP 2 LEADER  
 Just lots of work. There’s nothing there to see.  
  
CHORAL GROUP 1 LEADER  
 Well, we haven’t seen him either—  
 not on the path facing the rising sun.  
CHORUS  
 Who then can lead me on,  
 what toiling sons of the sea,  
 sleepless in their shacks?  
 What nymph on high Olympus  
 or from the streams that flow  
 into the Bosphorus  
 could say if she has seen somewhere  
 fierce-hearted Ajax wandering around?  
 It is not fair that after a long search  
 and so much effort I can’t find  
 the proper path to him. I cannot see  
 where that elusive man might be.  
[Enter TECMESSA behind the Chorus. As she moves on, she stumbles across the corpse of  
Ajax]  
TECMESSA  
 Ahhh . . . .  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Who cried out? It sounded close,  
 from that group of trees.  
TECMESSA  
 O how horrible . . . .  
CHORUS LEADER  
 I see her, the unfortunate young bride,  
 Tecmessa, a prize won with his spear—  
 she’s lying there, prostrate with grief, in pain . . .  
TECMESSA  
 I’m lost . . . destroyed . . . my life is over.  
 O my friends. . . .  
CHORUS LEADER  
 What’s happened?  

TECMESSA  
 It’s our Ajax—  
 he’s lying here . . . he’s just been murdered,  
 his body’s wrapped around a buried sword.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 O no! Our dreams of getting home are gone.  

 Alas, my king, you have destroyed me, too,   
 the one who sailed across the seas with you . . . .  
 you poor, unhappy man . . . heart-sick lady . . .  
TECMESSA  
 With Ajax dead like this, we have good cause  
 to wail out our grief.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Who did this?  
 With whose help could ill-fated Ajax  
 have gone through with this?  
TECMESSA  
 He did it by himself.  
 That’s clear. This sword fixed upright in the ground  
 indicates he fell down on top of it.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Alas, for my own foolishness!  
 You bled to death alone, with no friends there  

 to keep an eye on you. I was so stupid,  
 so blind to everything. I took no care.  
 And now, now where does stubborn Ajax lie,  
 a man whose very name suggests misfortune. [^note-423]  
TECMESSA  
 He’s not a spectacle to gaze upon!  
 With this cloak I will cover him completely,  
 tuck it all around him—for nobody,  
 at least no one who was a friend of his,  
 could bear to see him, as he spurts blood  
 up his nostrils and from that dark red wound,   
 his self-inflicted slaughter. Alas!  
 What shall I do? What friend of yours  
 will lift you up for burial? Where’s Teucer?  
 How I wish that he would come right now,  
 when we need him—if he ever comes  
 to care for the body of his brother.  
 O ill-fated Ajax, how could a man like you  
 end up like this? Even your enemies  
 must find you worthy of a funeral song.  
CHORUS  
 O you unhappy man, how you were doomed,  
 with that unbending heart of yours,  
 fated to live out an evil destiny  
 of endless suffering.  
 I know you groaned such hostile words  
 against the sons of Atreus  
 all night long and in the morning light,  
 the fatal passion of a stubborn heart.  
 It’s obvious that when those weapons  
 were made the prizes in the competition  
 for the finest of our battle warriors,  
 that was a potent source of trouble.  
TECMESSA  
 Alas! Alas for me!  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Your heart, I know,  
 is truly filled with grief.  
TECMESSA  
 Such misery for me!  
CHORUS LEADER  
 It’s no surprise to me, my lady,   

 you wail and wail again, for you’ve just lost  
 a man you loved so much.  
TECMESSA  
 You only guess  
 how it must feel, but I experience it,  
 and to the limit.  

CHORUS LEADER  
 That’s true enough.  
TECMESSA  
 Alas, my son, what kind of slavery  
 will yoke us now as we move on from here,   
 what sort of taskmasters stand over us?  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Ah, now you’ve given voice to your concerns  
 about unspeakable actions by those men,  
 the two unfeeling sons of Atreus,  
 in this our present grief. May god restrain them!  
TECMESSA  
 But these events would not have taken place  

 without the gods’ consent.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Yes—they have set  
 a burden too heavy for us to bear.  
TECMESSA  
 It’s Athena, Zeus’ savage daughter.  
 What miseries that goddess has produced,   
 and for Odysseus’ sake.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 I’m sure that man,  
 who has endured so much, in his black heart  
 exults and laughs with lofty arrogance  
 at these insane disasters. Such mockery!  
 Such a disgrace! And when they hear of this,  
 those two royal sons of Atreus  
 will join his merriment.  

TECMESSA  
 Then let them laugh!  
 Let them get their joy from this man’s agony.  
 Although they did not sense their need of him  
 while he was living, perhaps they’ll mourn his death  
 when they need him in war. Men with brutal minds  
 have no idea what fine things they possess  
 until they throw them out. Ajax’s death— 

 to me so bitter and to them so sweet—  
 at least has brought him joy, for he has got  
 what he desired, the death he yearned for.  
 So why should these men make fun of him?  
 His death is the gods’ concern, not theirs. No!   

 So let Odysseus vaunt his empty jests.  
 For them Ajax is dead—for me he’s gone,   
 abandoning me to grief and mourning.  
TEUCER [heard offstage]  
 No, no . . . No!  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Be quiet. I think I hear Teucer’s voice.  
 His shouts send out a tone which penetrates  
 the heart of this disaster.  
[Enter TEUCER]  
TEUCER [moving up to Ajax’s body]  
 O dearest Ajax,  
 my bright source of joy, my brother,  
 what’s happened to you. Is the rumour true?  
CHORUS LEADER  
 He’s dead, Teucer. That’s the truth.  
TEUCER  
 Alas! Then I bear a heavy destiny!   

CHORUS LEADER  
 Given how things stand . . . .  
TEUCER  
 This is too sad.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 . . . you have good cause to grieve.  
TEUCER  
 This act of his,   
 so rash and passionate . . . .  

CHORUS LEADER  
 Yes, Teucer,  
 passion in excess.  
TEUCER  
 This is disastrous!  
 What about his son? Where on Trojan soil  
 can I find him?  
CHORUS LEADER  
 He’s in the hut—all by himself.  
TEUCER [To Tecmessa]  
 You—bring him here as soon as possible,  
 in case he gets snatched by an enemy,  
 the way a hunter grabs a lion cub  
 and leaves its mother childless. Go quickly!  
 We need your help. For it’s a fact all men  
 love to laugh in triumph above the dead,   
 when they’re stretched out before them.  
[Exit TECMESSA]  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Teucer,  
 when Ajax was alive, he said that you  

 should look after his son, as you’re now doing.  
TEUCER  
 O this is surely the most painful sight  
 of anything my eyes have ever seen.  
 And, of all the roads I’ve travelled, the worst,  
 the one most deeply painful to my heart,  
 is that pathway I’ve just walked along,  
 while trying to track you down, dearest Ajax,  
 once I’d learned your fate. There was some gossip,   
 some tale to do with you. It spread quickly,  
 as if sent by a god, to all the Argives.  
 It said that you had wandered off and died.  
 I heard the details far away from here  
 and there I groaned with sorrow. Now I’m here,  
 I see it for myself. It breaks my heart.  

 It’s dreadful. Come, take off this covering,  
 so I get a full view of this horror.  

[Attendants remove the cloak covering Ajax’s body]  
 O that face—it’s so painful to see now,  
 so full of bitter daring. How many sorrows  
 you have sown for me by this destruction!  
 Where can I go? What sort of people  
 will take me in, when I was no use to you  
 in times of trouble? No doubt Telamon,  
 who fathered you and me, will welcome me,  
 perhaps with smiles and words of kindness,  
 when I reach home without you. Of course he will!   

 For he’s the kind of man who never smiles,  
 not cheerfully, even when things go well.  
 A man like that—what will he not say?   
 What sort of insult will he not hurl at me—  
 a bastard spawned by some battle-prize of his,  
 who, because of his unmanly cowardice,  
 betrayed you, dearest Ajax, or by treachery  
 tried to seize your power and your home,  
 once you were dead. That’s what Telamon will say.  
 He’s a bad-tempered man, and his old age  
 has made him harsh—his anger likes to argue  
 over nothing. He’ll end up banishing me,  
 throw me from the land. What he’ll say of me  
 will make me seem a slave instead of free.  

 That’s what will happen if I go back home.  
 Here in Troy I have many enemies,  
 and few ways of getting help. All this  
 has happened to me because you’ve been killed.  
 It’s a disaster. What am I to do?  
 How do I raise you up, you sad corpse,  
 from the sharp bite of this glittering sword,  
 your murderer, on which you breathed your last?  
 You’ve come to sense how, in good time, Hector,   
 though dead, was going to slaughter you. Look here,  
 by the gods—see the fate of these two men.  
 First, Hector was lashed tight to that chariot rail  

 with the very belt Ajax had given him,  
 and underwent continual mutilation  
 until he gasped his life away. [^note-424]  
Then Ajax  
 took Hector’s gift in hand and used it  
 to kill himself in that death-dealing fall.  
 Surely a vengeful Fury forged this blade,  
 and that harsh craftsman Hades made that belt?   
 For my part, I would assert that gods  
 have plotted these events—they always do  
 in everything that mortal men go through.  
 If someone finds this view objectionable,  
 let him love his own beliefs, as I do mine.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Don’t stay too long. You need to think  

 how we can bury Ajax. And what to say.  
 It’s urgent. For someone coming here,  
 a man who is our enemy. It could be  
 he comes to mock at our misfortunes, a man  
 who thrives on harm.  
TEUCER  
 Who is it—the man you see?  
 What member of the army?  
CHORUS LEADER  
 It’s Menelaus,  
 the one for whom we launched this expedition.  
TEUCER  
 I see him. He’s not hard to recognize  
 when he’s so close.  
[Enter MENELAUS, with a small escort of soldiers]  
MENELAUS  
 You there—I order you  
 not to take up that corpse for burial.  
 Leave it where it is.  
TEUCER  
 Why waste your words  
 with such an order?  

MENELAUS  
 I think it’s fitting,   

 as does the commander of our army.  
TEUCER  
 Then would it bother you to tell me why  
 you issue this command?  
MENELAUS  
 The reason’s this:
 we hoped that we were leading Ajax here,  
 away from home, so he’d be our ally,  
 someone friendly to the Argives, but instead,  
 when we saw him more closely, we found out  
 he was more hostile than the Phrygians. [^note-425]  
 He planned to destroy our entire army  
 and set off at night to take us with his spear.  
 If some god had not frustrated his attempt,  
 we would have met the same fate he did—   
 we’d be dead and lying there, struck down  
 by shameful fate, and he’d be still alive.  

 But now, it’s clear a god changed these events,  
 and so the violence in his heart fell elsewhere,  
 on sheep and cattle. And that’s the reason  
 there’s no one powerful enough right now  
 to take his corpse and set it in a grave.  
 Instead it will be tossed away somewhere  
 on the yellow sand, food for shore birds.  
 Remember that. Curb the anger in your heart.  
 If we could not control him when he lived,  
 at least he will obey us now he’s dead.  
 Even if you don’t agree, our forceful hands  
 will take charge of him. When he was alive,  
 Ajax never listened to a word I said.  

 And it’s a fact that when a common man  
 thinks it’s appropriate to disobey  
 those in command, he truly demonstrates  
 his worthless character. Within the city  
 the laws could never foster benefits  
 if there was no established place for fear.  
 Nor can one lead the troops with wise restraint  
 where there is neither fear or reverence  
 to act in their defence. So any man,  
 no matter how powerful his body grows,  
 must realize he’ll fall, even when  
 the harm to him seems trivial. A man  
 who has in him a sense of fear and shame  
 is quite secure—you can be sure of that—   

 but where there’s room for hostile arrogance  
 and men do what they want, consider how  
 a state like that, though it has raced ahead  
 with favouring winds, will, in the course of time,  
 sink in the ocean depths eventually.  
 And so for me let fear be set in place  
 where it’s appropriate. Let’s not believe  
 we can just do whatever we desire  
 and not pay the painful consequence.  
 These matters fluctuate—Ajax was once  
 a man of fiery insolence, but now  
 it’s time for me to manifest my power.  
 And thus I warn you not to bury him.  

 If you do, you just might fall yourself  
 into your grave.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Menelaus,  
 after setting out such well-thought precepts,  
 do not become too arrogant yourself  
 in dealing with the dead.  
TEUCER  
 Fellow soldiers,  
 never again will I be much surprised  
 if someone born a nobody goes wrong,  
 since those apparently of noble birth  
 can make so many errors when they speak.  
 Come, tell me once more from the beginning—  
 do you really think it was you personally  
 who led Ajax here an Argive ally?  
 Did he not sail to Troy all on his own,  
 under his own command? In what respect  
 are you this man’s superior? On what ground  

 do you have any right to rule those men  
 whom he led here from home? You came to Troy  
 as king of Sparta. You do not govern us.  

 Under no circumstance did some right to rule  
 or give him orders lie within your power,  
 just as he possessed no right to order you.  
 You sailed here a subordinate to others,  
 not as commander of the entire force  
 who could at any time tell Ajax what to do.  
 Go, be king of those you rule by right—  
 use those proud words of yours to punish them.  
 But I will set this body in a grave,  
 as justice says I should, even though you  
 or any other general forbids it.  
 I am not afraid of your pronouncements.  
 Ajax did not join the expedition  
 because that woman was a wife of yours,  
 as did those toiling Spartan drudges—no—  
 but because he’d sworn an oath to do it. [^note-426]  
 You were no part of it. He never valued  
 men worth nothing. And so when you return,  
 come back here and bring more heralds with you,  
 as well as the commander. Your vain chat  
 is not something that really bothers me,  
 not while you stay the kind of man you are.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 When things go badly, I don’t like to hear  
 a tone like that. Even when it’s justified,  
 harsh language stings.  
MENELAUS  
 This mere archer  
 seems to entertain some big ideas. [^note-427]  
TEUCER  
 Indeed I do.  
 My skill is not something to underrate.  
  
MENELAUS  
 My, my—if only you possessed a shield,  
 how grand your boasts would be.  
TEUCER  
 Even with no shield,  
 I’d get the better of you fully armed.  
MENELAUS  
 That tongue of yours, how it likes to feed  
 the savage spirit inside!  
TEUCER  
 When a man is right,  
 he’s entitled to make impressive claims.  
MENELAUS  
 Do you mean to tell me it is just  
 for someone to be treated generously  
 when he’s killed me?  
TEUCER  
 Killed you? Your words sound odd,  
 if, after being killed, you are now alive.  
MENELAUS  
 Some god saved me. As far as Ajax knows,  
 I’m dead and gone.  
TEUCER  
 Since the gods rescued you,  
 you should not dishonour them.  
MENELAUS  
 You mean  
 I could be violating sacred laws?   

TEUCER  
 Yes, if you personally intervened  
 to prevent the burial of the dead.  
MENELAUS  
 That’s not so with a personal enemy.  
 To bury him would not be right.  

TEUCER  
 What’s that?  
 Did Ajax ever march ahead in battle  
 as your enemy?  
MENELAUS  
 He hated me,  
 and I hated him. But you knew that.  
TEUCER  
 Yes, he did, because you were found out—  
 you tampered with the vote which robbed him.  
MENELAUS  
 The judges beat him in that competition,  
 not me.  
TEUCER  
 With your deceitful secrecy  
 you can conceal so many crimes.  
MENELAUS  
 Words like that  
 could well prove painful to someone I know.  
TEUCER  
 Well, I don’t think they will bring more pain  
 than we’ll inflict.  
MENELAUS  
 Once and for all, then,   

 I tell you this: that man will not be buried.  
TEUCER  
 Then hear my answer: Ajax’s corpse  
 will have a burial.  
MENELAUS  
 I have already seen a man  
 with a bold tongue urging sailors on  
 to launch a voyage during winter storms.  
 But you could hear no sound from him at all  
 once the storm got nasty. He hid himself  
 under a cloak and then let the sailors 

 step on him at will. You’re just like him,  
 you and your braggart mouth—a mighty squall,  
 even from a tiny cloud, in no time  
 will snuff out your constant shouting.  
TEUCER  
 And I have seen a man stuffed with stupidity,   

 whose pride delighted in his neighbours’ grief.  
 Then someone like me, with my temperament,  
 faced up to him and said something like this,  
 “Hey, you there, don’t harm the dead. If you do,  
 you can be sure you’ll find yourself in trouble.”
 So he warned the paltry fellow face to face.  
 I see him now, and it appears to me  
 he is none other than yourself. I trust  
 I haven’t talked too much in riddles?  
MENELAUS  
 I’m leaving. It would be a great disgrace  
 if men found out I’ve started arguing  

 when I could use my power.  
TEUCER  
 Be off with you!  
 It would be a great disgrace to me  
 to listen to such silly chattering  
 from some fool.  
[MENELAUS and his escort leave the way they came]  
CHORUS LEADER  
 We’re going to see  
 a major altercation from this argument.  
 As quickly as you can, Teucer, you should make  
 a hollow grave for Ajax, where he’ll rest  
 in a dark tomb, and people for all time  
 will keep him in their memory.  
[Enter TECMESSA and EURYSACES]  
TEUCER  
 Ah, just in time—  
 his woman and his son have now arrived  

 to perform a funeral for this sad corpse. 
AJAX  
 Come, lad, move over here. Stand there by him.  
 Set your hand in supplication on him,  
 on your father, from whom you were born.  
 Kneel down in prayer—hold firmly in your hand  
 locks of hair from me, from her, from you—  
 the three of us. These give the suppliant strength. [^note-428]  
 If any member of the army tries  
 to remove you from this corpse by force,  
 then may that wicked man become an exile,   
 tossed out from his own land in misery,  
 and remain unburied, his roots severed  
 from his whole race, just as I cut this hair.  
 Take this, my boy, and guard it. And don’t let  

 any man push you away. Stay kneeling here,  
 and hang on tight. You sailors over there,  
 don’t stand around the place like women.  
 You’re men. Stand on guard here, and protect him,  
 till I get back, once I’ve set up the grave.  
 I don’t care who has forbidden it.  
[Exit TEUCER]  
CHORUS  
 When will our last year here arrive?  
 When will the number of those wandering years  
 come to an end—and my interminable fate  
 to go on carrying this toiling spear  
 across the wide expanse of Troy,  
 a sorrow and a shame for Greeks?  
 How I wish that man had been swept off  
 high into the great sky or into Hades,  
 the home that all men share,  
 before he’d introduced the Greeks  
 to that war mood which sucks up everyone,  
 those weapons of the god of war,  
 which every man detests.  
 O those toils which just produce more toil!  
 That man has wiped out our humanity.  
  
 He gave me as my portion no delight  
 in garlands or full cups of wine,   

 no sweet tunes from flutes around me,  
 that ill-fated wretch, or in the night  
 the joys of sleep. And as for love—alas!—   
 he has denied me love. I lie here  
 forgotten, my hair always drenched  
 from thickly falling dew, ah yes,  
 my memories from desolate Troy.  

 Bold Ajax used to be my rampart once,  
 my constant wall against night fears  
 and flying weapons aimed at me.  
 But he has now become a sacrifice  
 to some malevolent deity.  
 What pleasure, then, what joy  
 now lies in store for me?  
 O how I wish I were back there,  
 where the wooded wave-washed headland  
 juts out, our guard against the open sea,  
 below the high flat rock of Sunium,   

 and we could then greet sacred Athens. [^note-429]  
[Enter TEUCER, in a hurry]  
TEUCER  
 I’ve just seen commander Agamemnon.  
 He coming here, and quickly. So I ran back.  
 He’s clearly going to give his blundering mouth  
 some exercise.  
[Enter AGAMEMNON with an armed escort]  
AGAMEMNON  
 You there—I’ve been told  
 you’ve dared to mouth foul threats against us  
 with impunity. I’m talking about you,  
 the son of a mere slave, a battle trophy.  
 If some well-bred lady were your mother,  
 no doubt your boasts would soar high in the sky,   

 and you would strut around on tip toe.  
 You are a nobody, and here you act  
 the champion for this nonentity.  
 In all seriousness you made the claim  
 we voyaged here with no authority,   
 as commanders of the troops or of the fleet,  
 to give orders to Achaeans or to you,  
 since Ajax sailed under his own command.  
 Is it not shameful that I have to hear  
 such monstrous insults from the mouths of slaves?  
 This man you shout about with so much pride,  
 what sort of man was he? Where did he go  
 or stand and fight, where I was not there, too?  
 Do the Achaeans have no man but him?  
 It seems it was a painful thing we did  
 when we announced to all Achaeans  
 that competition for Achilles’ weapons,   

 if in every quarter we appear corrupt,  
 thanks to Teucer, and if you people here  
 never will be satisfied, not even  
 after you have been put down, and yield  
 to what most of the judges thought was fair.  
 Instead you will no doubt keep hurling at us  
 these constant gibes, or from your station in the rear  
 treacherously lash out at us. In places  
 where such conditions hold you’ll never find  
 a settled order based on rule of law,  
 not if we discard the men who justly win  
 and put in front the ones who lag behind.  
 No. We must prevent such tendencies.  

 It’s not the big, broad-shouldered warriors  
 who make the most reliable allies—  
 it’s men who think—they win out every time.  
 One guides a broad-backed ox straight down the path  
 with only a small whip. And I can see  
 you’ll soon receive some of that medicine,  
 unless you get yourself some common sense.  
 That man is no longer living—by this time  
 he has become a shade, and here you are  
 rashly insulting us, letting your mouth  
 run on and on. You should control yourself.  
 Do you not realize who you are by birth?  
 Why not let another man step forward,   

 someone free born, to state your case to us  
 instead of you? For when you’re speaking,   
 I’m not prepared to listen any more.  

 To me your barbarian way of speaking  
 is quite impossible to understand.  
CHORUS LEADER  
 I wish you two were sensible enough  
 to show some self-restraint. Nothing I say  
 would be more useful to the both of you.  
TEUCER [addressing the corpse of Ajax]  
 Well now, how quickly among mortal men  
 grateful thoughts about the dead are gone  
 and turn into betrayal. This man here  
 can’t even manage a few words, Ajax,   
 to celebrate your memory, and yet  
 you often risked your life protecting him,  
 hefting that spear of yours in battle.  

 But now, as you can see, all those great deeds  
 are dead and gone, all thrown aside.  
[Teucer turns to address Agamemnon]  
 And you,  
 you talk a lot of a utter foolishness.  
 Have you no longer any memory  
 of the time when you were all bunched up  
 inside the rampart, almost done for  
 in that spear fight—then Ajax showed up,   
 all on his own, and kept protecting you,  
 with flames already blazing on your ships,  
 spreading across the decks right at the stern,  
 and Hector leaping high across the ditch,  
 heading for our fleet? Who held him back?   

 Was Ajax not the one who managed that,  
 the man you claim never went any place  
 where you did not go, too? Do you concede  
 his actions then, as far as you’re concerned,  
 set a high standard? And then another time,   
 when he faced up to Hector by himself  
 in single combat. No one ordered him.  
 He was picked out by lot, and his marker,  
 the one he threw in among the others,  
 was not designed to help him not get picked.  
 It was no lump of moistened clay, no,  
 but a light one which would be the first  
out of the crested helmet. [^note-430]  
Yes, Ajax  
 was the one who did these things, and I,  
 the slave whose mother was a foreigner,  
 was there beside him. You miserable man,  
 where are your eyes when you go on like this?  
 Do you not realize your father’s father,  
 ancient Pelops, was a barbarian,  
 who came from Phrygia? And Atreus,  
 the man who spawned you, wasn’t he the one  
 who prepared that sacrilegious dinner,  
 and served up his own brother’s children as a meal  
 for him to eat? [^note-431] And then, as for yourself,  
 the mother who bore you came from Crete.  
 And her own father caught her having sex,  
 screwing some stranger. He abandoned her  
 to be killed in silence by a bunch of fish. [^note-432]  

 That’s the kind of man you are. How can you  
 insult a man like me about my origins?  
 I am a son of Telamon, who won  
 my mother as his consort, his own prize  
 for being the army’s finest warrior.  
 She was of royal blood, Laomedon’s daughter,  
 the most desirable of all the battle spoils.  
 Alcmene’s son gave her to Telamon. [^note-433]  
 Since I am nobly born and my parents  
 are both noble, too, how could I disgrace  
 my own flesh and blood? Ajax is lying here,  
 overcome by all his troubles, and you—  
 aren’t you ashamed to say you’ll toss him out  
 without a burial? Well, think of this—  
 if you just throw him out, along with him  
 you’ll be casting off three more as well.  
 It’s a finer thing for men to see me die  

 while labouring hard on his behalf  
 than fighting for your woman—or should I say  
 your brother’s wife? Given what I’ve said,  
 don’t think about my safety; look to your own.  
 For if you make things difficult for me,  
 you’re going to wish you had been more afraid  
 and not quite so bold when you confronted me.  
[Enter ODYSSEUS alone]  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Lord Odysseus, you’ve come just in time,  
 if you’re here to calm things, not make them worse.  
ODYSSEUS  
 My friends, what’s going on? From a long way off  
 I heard the sons of Atreus shouting out  
 over this brave man’s body.  
AGAMEMNON  
 Lord Odysseus,  
 we have had to listen for far too long  

 to the most shameful language from this man.  
 Is that not reason enough?  
ODYSSEUS  
 Well, let’s see—  
 I could forgive a man who had been listening  
 to someone else who was abusing him  
 and who then joined in a war of insults.  
AGAMEMNON  
 I did insult him, because his actions  
 were a direct affront to me.  
ODYSSEUS  
 What did he do  
 to injure you?  
AGAMEMNON  
 He says he will not let  

 this corpse remain without a burial.  
 He’ll set it in a grave, no matter what I do.  
ODYSSEUS  
 Well, may someone who’s a friend of yours  
 speak his mind and still remain a colleague  
 the way he was before?  
AGAMEMNON  
 You should speak out.  

 I would scarcely be thinking properly  
 if I said no. Among the Argives  
 I consider you my greatest friend.  
ODYSSEUS  
 Then listen. In deference to the gods  
 don’t be so unyielding you throw Ajax out  
 without a burial. You should not let  
 that spirit of violence at any time  
 seize control of you, not to the extent  
 that you then trample justice underfoot.  
 This man became my greatest enemy  
 in all our army on that very day  
 I beat him for the armour of Achilles.  
 But for all the man’s hostility to me,  
 I would not disgrace him. Nor would I deny  
 that in my view he was the finest warrior  

 among the Argive men who came to Troy,  
 after Achilles. So if you dishonour him,  
 you would be unjust. It would not harm him,  
 but you’d be contravening all those laws  
 the gods established. When a good man dies,  
 it is not right to harm him, even though  
 he may be someone you hate.  
AGAMEMNON  
 Odysseus,  
 you mean you’re arguing against me,  
 on his behalf?  
ODYSSEUS  
 Yes, that’s what I mean.  
 I did hate him, when it was all right to hate.  

AGAMEMNON  
 Why would you not walk all over him,  
 now that he’s dead?  
ODYSSEUS  
 Son of Atreus,  
 do not take pleasure in advantages  
 which are dishonourable.  
AGAMEMNON  
 An all-powerful king  

 does not show reverence all that easily.  
ODYSSEUS  
 But he can give out honourable rewards  
 to friends when they advise him prudently.  
AGAMEMNON  
 A good man should obey those in command.  
ODYSSEUS  
 Why not concede? You’ll still be in control,   
 although you let your friends prevail against you.  
AGAMEMNON  
 Just remember the kind of man he was,  
 the one for whom you want to do this favour.  
ODYSSEUS  
 The man was an enemy of mine, that’s true.  
 But he was once a noble warrior.  
AGAMEMNON  
 Why are you doing this? Why such respect  
 for the dead body of an enemy?  
ODYSSEUS  
 His excellence moves me to do it,  
 far more than his hostility to me.  
AGAMEMNON  
 Men who act the way you’re doing now  
 are unreliable.  

ODYSSEUS  
 Let me assure you,  
 among human beings most are changeable,  
 sometimes friendly, then sometimes bitter.  
AGAMEMNON  
 Are those the sort of men you’d recommend  

 that we accept as friends?  
ODYSSEUS  
 Well, I wouldn’t recommend  
 we choose someone inflexible.  
AGAMEMNON  
 All right,  
 but now you’ll make us look like cowards.  
ODYSSEUS  
 No. Every Greek will think we’re being just.  
AGAMEMNON  
 So you would urge me to give my permission,  
 and let this corpse receive a burial?   
ODYSSEUS  
 I would. For I myself will someday reach  
 the state he’s in, as well.  
AGAMEMNON  
 There we have it.  
 All men work to benefit themselves.  
ODYSSEUS  
 For whom should I make such an effort  
 if not for myself?  
AGAMEMNON  
 We’ll have to announce  
 that you’re the one responsible for this,  
 not me.  
ODYSSEUS  
 However you do it, it will serve  
 to bring you all kinds of advantages.  

AGAMEMNON  
 Well, in any case, you can rest assured  

 I would grant you a greater favour  
 than this burial. As for this man here,  
 down in the underworld he is my enemy,  
 just as he was on earth. But you can do  
 whatever you think is appropriate.  
[AGAMEMNON and his escort leave]  
CHORUS LEADER  
 Given how you have acted here today,  
 Odysseus, any man who now asserts  
 that you are not by nature wise is stupid.  
ODYSSEUS  
 I now proclaim that from this moment on  
 I am Teucer’s friend, as much as earlier  
 I was his enemy. And I am willing  
 to join with him in burying the dead,  
 working with you and omitting nothing  
 human beings may need to honour and respect  

 their finest warriors.  
TEUCER  
 Noble Odysseus,  
 I have nothing but praise for what you’ve said.  
 You have done so much to disprove my fears.  
 Of all the Argives, you were the one  
 who was his greatest enemy, and yet  
 you are the only one to stand by him,  
 to lend a helping hand. For when he died  
 and you were still alive, you could not bear  
 to see such injuries inflicted on him,  
 not like that frantic general who was here.  
 He and his brother wanted their revenge  
 by casting Ajax off without a grave.  
 And so may our all-ruling father Zeus,  
 high on Olympus, the unforgiving Furies,   

 and Justice, too, who fulfils all things,  
 destroy those evil men with evil deaths,  
 just as they tried to rid themselves of Ajax,   
 outrageous treatment he did not deserve.  
 But you, child of venerable Laertes,  

 I hesitate to let you touch the corpse  
 in these funeral rites, for that may well offend  
 the man who died. But as for all the rest,  
 join in with us. If you wish, bring someone,  
 any soldier in the army will be welcome.  
 I must get all things ready. Odysseus,  
 you must know you’ve acted nobly for us.  
ODYSSEUS  
 That’s what I wished. But if you object  

 to my participation here with you,  
 I’ll defer to what you want and leave.  
[ODYSSEUS leaves]  
TEUCER  
 Enough. Too much time has passed already.  
 Hurry now. Some of you scoop out a hollow grave,  
 others set the cauldron high up on the stand,  
 with fire all around, so we can start  
 the ritual cleansing promptly. One of you,  
 bring from his hut the armour he would wear  
 behind his shield. And you, too, my child,  
 since he’s your father, use those loving arms  

 with all the strength you have and help me lift him.  
 His windpipe is still warm, and from it flows  
 his own dark spirit. Come then, come all of you  
 who say your are our friends, come quickly,  
 move out, and with your efforts honour Ajax.  
 There was no one to match his excellence. [^note-434]  
 No nobler man has received such honour.  
CHORUS  
 I know of many things which mortal men  
 can see and learn from. But until he meets it,  
 no one sees what is to come or his own fate.  

[They all leave, bearing the body of Ajax.]  
  
  
[^note-401]: *. . . of the army*: According to Homer, Ajax’s encampment lay at one end of the Argive line, a position more exposed than other parts and hence a mark of Ajax’s courage. Achilles’ encampment was at the other end. The phrase “of the army” has been added to clarify this point. 

[^note-402]: These lines make clear that Odysseus cannot, at this point, see Athena, either because it is still too dark or because she has concealed herself somewhere (or both). Given what happens in a moment, it is not feasible that Athena is simply a disembodied voice. 

[^note-403]: *. . . insanely angry*: When Achilles, the greatest fighter among the Argive leaders, was killed (shortly before the action of this play) his divinely made armour was set up as a prestigious prize among the Argive warriors. Odysseus and Ajax were the main claimants, and as the result of a vote among the Argive leaders, the weapons were awarded to Odysseus, over the strong objections of Ajax, who, according to Homer, was ranked the finest Argive warrior after Achilles. 

[^note-404]: *. . . both commanders*: The two commanders are Agamemnon and Menelaus, sons of Atreus and the chief leaders of the Argive forces at Troy. 

[^note-405]: *. . . divided up*: This detail means that Ajax has killed animals belonging to everyone, since all soldiers were to receive some of the cattle or sheep as battle spoils. 

[^note-406]: *. . . both sons of Atreus*: the brothers Agamemnon and Menelaus, the two leaders of the Argive forces at Troy. 

[^note-407]: *. . . disrespect*: In Homer’s Iliad, Athena consistently supports the Argives, including Ajax, during the Trojan War. 

[^note-408]: *. . . son of Telamon*: an epithet for Ajax, whose father was Telamon (also the father of Teucer, but not with the same mother). 

[^note-409]: *. . . Sisyphus*: according to some legends Odysseus was the son of Sisyphus, a notoriously bad king of Corinth (rather than the son of Laertes, king of Ithaca, as in the Odyssey). This genealogy was a slur used by Odysseus’ enemies. Later in the play, Teucer calls Odysseys “son of Laertes” 

[^note-410]: *. . . sons of . . . Erechtheus*: Erechtheus was a legendary king of Athens who was born from the earth and thus gave the Athenians the claim that they were true natives of the land where they lived (autochthonous). Sophocles is here linking the sailors of Salamis with the residents of Athens (the audience). Salamis is an island just off the coast of Attica, the territory around and belonging to Athens. 

[^note-411]: *Teucer*: an important Argive warrior, Ajax’s half-brother. 

[^note-412]: *. . . ancestral father*: Ajax was son of Telamon, son of Aeacus, son of Zeus. 

[^note-413]: Erebus: the gloomy underworld of Hades, the land of the dead. 

[^note-414]: *Scamander*: the main river flowing near the city of Troy. It is not entirely clear why Ajax calls the river “friendly,” since in Homer the god of the river fought against Achilles in order to help the Trojans. 

[^note-415]: These lines link Ajax’s name in Greek (Aias) with the Greek verb meaning to cry “Alas” (aiai). The similarity is difficult to render precisely in English if one uses the common English name Ajax. The words “Alas for Ajax” have been added in an attempt to make this point somewhat clearer (and the word poetically has been used rather than the more accurate descriptively. 

[^note-416]: *. . . father’s excellence*: Telamon, father of Ajax, had attacked Troy in an earlier expedition with Hercules and had been awarded as a prize Hesione, a princess of Troy (mother of Ajax’s half-brother Teucer). Ida is a mountain very close to Troy. 

[^note-417]: *. . . another man*: Ajax’s point here is that if he had not lost his sanity, he would have killed the sons of Atreus and thus resolved the matter of the voting, which he sees as an injustice, since the result awarded the weapons to Odysseus.  

[^note-418]: *. . . after death*: What Tecmessa says here is curious because her family was killed by Ajax himself, as she mentions a few lines earlier. It may be that she is trying to win his sympathy and does not want to remind him of that specifically. 

[^note-419]: *. . . get your name*: Eurysaces, the name of the child, literally means “broad shield.” Ajax’s huge shield is described and celebrated in Homer’s Iliad. 

[^note-420]: . . . from the Argives: Homer recounts in the Iliad how Ajax received a sword from Hector, the great Trojan warrior-prince, in a mutual exchange of gifts, when their single combat was halted by both armies. 

[^note-421]: In the Iliad, after their single combat had been halted, Hector and Ajax ceremoniously pledged friendship in a mutual exchange of gifts. Yet Hector, as leader of the Trojans and their greatest warrior, was also Ajax’s most important enemy. 

[^note-422]: The suicide of Ajax provides a very rare example in Greek tragedy of a killing performed on stage. It is not clear, however, if it was done in full view of the audience or whether it was concealed somehow by a stage prop (like a bush). Ajax’s body is not plainly visible to anyone who wanders past, since it remains hidden from the Chorus for some time. 

[^note-423]: . . . suggest misfortune: Ajax’s name, as mentioned above, is very similar to the Greek verb aiai, “to cry alas!” 

[^note-424]: . . . life away: When Ajax and Hector fought in single combat in the Iliad, as mentioned earlier, the fight was stopped and the two warriors exchanged gifts. Ajax gave Hector a fine belt, and Hector presented a sword to Ajax. When Achilles later fought and defeated Hector, he tied Hector’s body to his chariot and desecrated the body by dragging it around in the dirt for days. However, in Homer’s account, Hector is clearly dead before this mutilation of his corpse starts. 

[^note-425]: Phrygians: Phrygia was an extensive area to the east of Troy (now modern Turkey). Here the word seems to mean Trojans generally. 

[^note-426]: *. . . oath to do it*: Teucer is perhaps splitting hairs here. Ajax was one of the suitors seeking to marry Helen, and, along with all the others, he swore to assist the man Helen chose to marry if called upon. That oath was not directed at Menelaus specifically, but once he became Helen’s husband, it applied to him. 

[^note-427]: *. . . mere archer*: Teucer was one of the finest archers in the Argive forces. Archers were, however, held in some contempt because, unlike spearman, they did not always fight hand to hand but from a distance. 

[^note-428]: . . . suppliant strength: offering locks of hair at the tomb of the departed was an important part of the funeral ritual, giving power to the prayers of those mourning the dead. 

[^note-429]: *Sunium*: an important cape near Athens, separating the open sea from the safer waters of the gulf. 

[^note-430]: *. . . crested helmet*: In the Iliad, the Achaeans chose a warrior to answer Hector’s challenge to single combat by lottery. Some warriors voluntarily put their tokens in a helmet, the helmet was shaken up, and the warrior whose lot fell out first was chosen (in this case it was Ajax’s token). The reference to the lump of moistened clay refers to the practice of putting in an exceptionally heavy marker, which had less chance of falling out first. 

[^note-431]: . . . for him to eat: The two brothers Atreus and Thyestes had quarrelled. Atreus invited Thyestes to a dinner of reconciliation and there served him his own children to eat. Thyestes ate them without knowing what he was doing. Atreus then revealed what he had done. 

[^note-432]: . . . bunch of fish: Agamemnon’s mother, Aerope, was a daughter of Catreus, a descendant of the royal family of Crete. The sexual exploit mentioned resulted in her being sent away to be killed by drowning, but she was instead given to Atreus as his wife. 

[^note-433]: . . . to Telamon: Alcmene’s son is Hercules, who went with Telamon to attack Troy in an earlier expedition. Laomedon was king of Troy. 

[^note-434]: . . . his excellence: the phrase which follows in the Greek reads “I mean, when he was living,” which deflates the tribute considerably. For that reason a number of editors have rejected it as spurious. I have followed their lead and omitted the words. 
  
  

